
--- Page 1 ---
Ensured: Explanations for Decreasing the Epistemic
Uncertainty in Predictions
Helena L ¨ofstr ¨oma,, Tuwe L ¨ofstr ¨oma, Johan Hallberg Szabadvarya
aJ¨ onk¨ oping AI Lab, Department of Computing, J¨ onk¨ oping University, J¨ onk¨ oping, Sweden
Abstract
This paper addresses a significant gap in explainable AI: the necessity of interpret-
ing epistemic uncertainty in model explanations. Although current methods mainly
focus on explaining predictions, with some including uncertainty, they fail to provide
guidance on how to reduce the inherent uncertainty in these predictions. To over-
come this challenge, we introduce new types of explanations that specifically target
epistemic uncertainty. These include ensured explanations , which highlight feature
modifications that can reduce uncertainty, and categorisation of uncertain explanations
counter-potential ,semi-potential , and super-potential which explore alternative sce-
narios. Our work emphasises that epistemic uncertainty adds a crucial dimension to
explanation quality, demanding evaluation based not only on prediction probability but
also on uncertainty reduction. We introduce a new metric, ensured ranking , designed to
help users identify the most reliable explanations by balancing trade-o ffs between un-
certainty, probability, and competing alternative explanations. Furthermore, we extend
theCalibrated Explanations method, incorporating tools that visualise how changes
in feature values impact epistemic uncertainty. This enhancement provides deeper in-
sights into model behaviour, promoting increased interpretability and appropriate trust
in scenarios involving uncertain predictions.
Keywords: Uncertainty Estimation, Epistemic Uncertainty, Ensured Explanations,
Venn Abers, Conformal Predictive Systems, Explainable AI
Email address: helena.lofstrom@ju.se (Helena L ¨ofstr ¨om)
Preprint submitted to Elsevier October 10, 2024arXiv:2410.05479v1  [cs.AI]  7 Oct 2024
--- Page 2 ---
1. Introduction
Decisions in critical contexts, such as criminal justice [1] or medicine [2], require a
well-founded basis for decision-making. Today, this is often achieved by incorporating
Artificial Intelligence (AI) using Machine Learning (ML) models trained on extensive
historical data. Although highly accurate, these models are not inherently objective
or infallible. They are a result of identified patterns in the input data and, therefore,
dependent on both the input and the algorithm itself.
The output of ML models often consists of a single output from the trained model,
indicating, e.g., a likely house price or the probable diagnosis of a patient. To under-
stand, critically inspect, and get support for decisions, it is essential that those a ffected
can understand the reasons behind the output. In other words, human users require and
have the right to demand explanations behind the decisions of these models. Several
countries have also highlighted the critical aspects of transparency and explanations in
such a system [3, 4].
Explanations can take various forms when presented to users [5], such as based on
examples similar to the instance to be explained [6], contributions of features [7, 8, 9],
pixels in images [10], or words in texts [11]. The explanations are generated to answer
the questions of why, how, and what if [12], to help the user identify when to trust
and not trust the model, and to provide the possibilities to make high-quality decisions
[13, 14, 15, 16].
Explanations can also be of di fferent types , depending on what they are intended
to explain [17, 18]. Factual explanations try to answer the question of why the model
predicts a certain outcome, whereas counter-factual explanations reveal the minimal
changes to the feature values which cause a change in the prediction [19, 20, 21],
e.g., what to change to get a loan when the model recommends a reject. Other types
of explanations include semi-factuals [22], representing maximal changes that can be
made without changing prediction, and super-factuals [23], representing changes that
increase belief in the predicted outcome. Counter–, semi-, and super-factuals all ex-
plore alternative outcomes when changing feature values in the data. The common
denominator of the explanation types is their focus on explaining the outcome of the
2
--- Page 3 ---
prediction. In other words, existing explanation types present how (changes to) feature
values a ffect the prediction or outcome.
However, recently [24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31] uncertainty has been highlighted
as critical in explaining predictions. A model may present a prediction with a probabil-
ity of 85%, and simultaneously be highly uncertain that this is the actual value. Only
presenting the probability to the user can in such a situation give the impression of a
trustworthy prediction, which may have caused another decision if the user knew about
the level of uncertainty. [32] showed that users rank the prediction uncertainty as more
important than the actual outcome in an AI model, and [33] highlights user uncertainty
as one of four (information overload, time pressure, and complexity) stress factors that
affect decision quality, while [25, 34] point to uncertainty as a form of transparency.
Due to this change in focus, new explanation methods have recently been developed
that reveal the uncertainty in the predictions. In SkiNet [35] and [36] the authors obtain
Bayesian versions of LIME and KernelSHAP, called BayesLIME and BayesSHAP that
include uncertainty in the form of credible intervals. In both ConformaSight [37] and
Calibrated Explanations [27] the authors use the Conformal Prediction framework to
gain statistically guaranteed confidence sets to estimate the level of uncertainty.
Although showing the uncertainty in the predictions, today’s explanations still fo-
cus on the prediction probability and outcome.
With uncertainty, predictions achieve an additional dimension to explain; possi-
ble increase and decrease of uncertainty. There is no explanation type to catch these
situations. Existing explanation methods could be said to explain a factual situation
of the included uncertainty, in the sense that they show feature values that cause the
actual level of uncertainty. Left to explain is, similar to the counterfactual situation,
when users want to understand what would cause a move from the current level of
uncertainty, i.e., to get ensured explanations.
Diversity (to generate several distinct explanations) and proximity (closeness to the
original datapoint) are two essential characteristics for alternative explanations [21, 19,
38, 39] which are also highly relevant to ensured explanations. With the possibility
to generate a large amount of explanations, it is essential to be able to identify the
most e fficient ones. This paper explores several promising metrics and methods to
3
--- Page 4 ---
identify ensured explanations, to help identify alternative explanations with the lowest
uncertainty and the highest probability.
To summarise, the main contributions of this paper are:
•The presentation of a new type of explanation, ensured explanations , which tar-
gets the question of reducing the epistemic uncertainty in explanations for AI
models.
•A new metric, ensured ranking metric to help users identify the most reliable ex-
planations and balance the trade-o ffs between uncertainty, probability, and com-
peting alternative explanations.
•An extension of the explanation method Calibrated Explanations with tools to
visualise how changes in feature values impact the balance between epistemic
uncertainty and probability1, including example plots pointing to the usefulness
ofensured explanations .
The paper is organised as follows: The next Section reviews fundamental concepts
related to explanation methods and calibration. The main contributions are introduced
in Section 3, defining ensured explanations and the implementation in Calibrated Ex-
planations. In Sections 5 and 4, the setup and results of the experiments involving the
suggested metric and methods are presented. The paper ends with a discussion and
conclusions.
2. Background
2.1. Post-Hoc Explanation Methods
Within eXplainable Artificial Intelligence (XAI), there are generally two approaches:
either developing models that are inherently interpretable and transparent or employing
post-hoc methods to explain black box models. In post-hoc explanation techniques,
simplified and interpretable models are constructed to uncover the relationships be-
tween feature values and the model’s predictions. The explanations are either local,
1Source code and documentation of the explanation type is found at Github: Calibrated Explanations.
4
--- Page 5 ---
focusing on explaining a single prediction, or global, focusing on explaining the be-
haviour of an entire model [17, 18].
There are two distinct strategies for explaining model predictions (see Figure 1),
factual explanations , where a feature value directly influences the prediction outcome,
andalternative explanations (such as, e.g., counter-factuals), exploring the potential
impact on predictions when altering the values of a feature [19, 20, 21]. Importantly,
alternative explanations are intrinsically local. They are particularly human-friendly,
mirroring how human reasoning operates [17].
Explanations of Outcome
Explain as it is
FactualExplore Alternatives
Change Prediction
Counter-FactualSame Prediction
Semi-Factual Super-Factual
Figure 1: The structure of post-hoc explanations when considering model prediction.
When considering probabilistic explanations2, there exist di fferent types (also called
modal narratives [23]) of explanations focusing on the prediction probability:
•Factual : The explanation is factual, as it explains the current situation, showing
how each feature value directly influences the prediction outcome [40].
•Counter-factual : In a counter-factual explanation, the minimal modifications
that cause a change in prediction of features are highlighted, e.g. going from a
probability above 0 .5 for the actual prediction to a probability below 0 .5, effec-
tively predicting a di fferent outcome [19, 20, 21].
•Super-factual : The super-factual explanation focuses on the constraining fac-
tors to prevent the counter-factual explanations could happen [41, 23]. In other
2We are assuming a binary scenario, focusing on the probability for the predicted class.
5
--- Page 6 ---
words, super-factual explanations help identify changes that increase the proba-
bility of the predicted class.
•Semi-factual : The semi-factual explanation shows the maximum feature modifi-
cation that does not cause a change of the prediction, i.e. the possible maximum
feature changes that do not alter the prediction [42, 43, 22, 44].
Factual explanations are directly applicable to regression as well, whereas counter-
factual, super-factual and semi-factual do not have any clear-cut definition in a regres-
sion context. Assuming higher predictions are better, a counter-factual could be defined
as any explanation3resulting in a lower prediction, and a super-factual would then be
any explanation resulting in a higher prediction. If lower is better, the reasoning can
simply be reversed, with counter-factuals for higher predictions and super-factuals for
lower. Semi-factuals would not fill any meaningful use in this scenario. However,
taking this reasoning one step further, we can assume a threshold (similar to 0.5 in
a probabilistic setting) and define counter-factuals, super-factuals, and semi-factuals
analogously as for probabilities above. Semi-factuals would represent any explanation
indicating outcomes between the original prediction and the threshold, counter-factuals
would represent any explanation beyond the threshold and super-factuals would repre-
sent any explanation above (or below) the prediction moving further away from the
threshold.
In the remainder of this paper, the main focus will be on explaining probabilistic
predictions, even if standard regression may be touched upon occasionally.
2.2. Calibration and Uncertainty Quantification
Making decisions based on accurate information is essential for e ffective decision-
making, emphasising the requirements of well-calibrated predictive models with guar-
antees.
Conformal Prediction (CP) [45] is a model-agnostic framework that generates pre-
diction regions with guaranteed coverage. Errors occur when the true value lies out-
3An explanation in this context is pointing at an alternative feature value that result in an alternative
prediction.
6
--- Page 7 ---
side these regions. Somewhat simplified, conformal predictors remain valid under the
assumption of exchangeability, maintaining a long-term error rate of ϵ. Conformal re-
gression (CR) o ffers prediction intervals with user-specified coverage guarantees, while
conformal predictive systems (CPS) [46] generate a cumulative conformal predictive
distribution (CPD). These CPDs allow querying for intervals with guaranteed cover-
age, similar to CR but with more flexibility. Intervals are determined by percentiles in
the distribution; for example, a symmetric interval with 90% coverage can be obtained
using the 5thand 95thpercentiles. In addition, CPDs can be queried to determine the
probability that the actual value falls below a user-defined threshold, which corresponds
to the percentile of that threshold within the distribution.
In classification, the emphasis typically shifts to ensuring that the probability esti-
mates provided by the classifier are well-calibrated, defined as follows:
P(c|Pc)≈Pc, (1)
Pcdenotes the probability estimate for the class label c. A well-calibrated model
ensures that the predicted probabilities align closely with the actual observed predic-
tions. For example, when a model assigns a probability estimate of 0 .9 to an instance,
the true accuracy of all such instances should be approximately 90%.
It is widely recognised that many predictive models generate poorly calibrated
probability estimates [47]. To correct this, an external calibration technique can be
applied using a separate set of the labelled dataset, the calibration set , to revise the
predicted probabilities and improve the calibration.
Within the Conformal Prediction framework, Venn [48] and Venn-Abers (V A) [49]
predictors are used to generate multiprobabilistic predictors as confidence-based prob-
ability intervals. Venn prediction works by employing a Venn taxonomy, which groups
calibration data to estimate probabilities. The probability estimate for a test instance
is determined by the relative frequency of each class among the calibration instances
within the same category (including the test instance). Designing an appropriate Venn
taxonomy can be complex, which is where V A predictors o ffer an advantage.
Venn-Abers Calibration automates taxonomy optimisation by leveraging isotonic
regression, producing dynamic probability intervals for binary classification tasks. V A
7
--- Page 8 ---
outputs one probability estimate for each of the possible class labels and one of the
probabilities is a perfectly calibrated probability estimate. Since the instance must
belong to one of these, the true probability must be either one or the other. Although
the true class label is unknown, the width and placement of the interval provide valuable
insights. A narrower interval implies greater confidence in the prediction, while a wider
interval reflects more uncertainty. To make the probability estimate more practical,
especially for the positive class, regularising the interval is a common approach used
to get a single probability estimate.
To construct a V A predictor for a test object xn+1, we define the training set as
Z={z1,..., zn}, where n=l+q. Each instance zi=(xi,yi) includes an object xi
(with feature set F) and its corresponding label yi. Typically, a separate calibration set
is needed, which is why the training set is divided into a proper training set Zlwith l
instances, and a calibration set Zq={z1,..., zq}4. A scoring classifier is then trained on
Zlto calculate the scores sfor{x1,..., xq,xn+1}. The score sis derived as the positive
class probability estimate from a classifier h. The steps of inductive V A prediction are
as follows:
1. Use{(s1,y1),..., (sq,yq),(sn+1,yn+1=0)}to derive the isotonic calibrator g0and
use{(s1,y1),..., (sq,yq),(sn+1,yn+1=1)}to derive the isotonic calibrator g1.
2. The probability interval for yn+1=1 is defined as [ g0(sn+1),g1(sn+1)] (hereafter
referred to as [Plow,Phigh], representing the lower and upper bounds of the inter-
val).
3. The regularised probability estimate for yn+1=1, minimising the log loss [49],
can be defined as:
P=Phigh
1−P low+Phigh(2)
To summarise: V A provides a calibrated (regularised) probability estimate P, along
with a probability interval defined by its lower and upper bounds, [ Plow,Phigh].
Conformal Predictive Systems (CPS) generate Conformal Predictive Distribu-
4For convenience, the calibration set is indexed 1 ,..., qrather than l+1,..., n, assuming random order-
ing.
8
--- Page 9 ---
tions (CPDs) for each test instance xn+1when working with numeric target domains,
such as in regression. To construct a CPS, assume there is an underlying regression
model htrained on the set Zl. Like other conformal predictors, CPS relies on noncon-
formity scores α, which measure the level of strangeness of a data point. In contrast to
conformal regression, where nonconformity typically is defined by the absolute error
αi=|yi−h(xi)|, CPS uses signed errors, defined as αi=yi−h(xi). The prediction for
the test instance xn+1is then represented by the following CPD:
CPD (y)=i+τ
q+1,ify∈ C(i),C(i+1),fori∈{0,...,q}
i′−1+(i′′−i′+2)τ
q+1,ify=C(i),fori∈{1,...,q}(3)
where C(1),..., C(q)are obtained from the calibration scores α1,...,α q, sorted in in-
creasing order:
C(i)=h(xn+1)+αi (4)
with C(0)=−∞andC(q+1)=∞. If a tie occurs, τis drawn from a uniform distribution
U(0,1) to ensure that the P-values of the target values are uniformly distributed. Here,
i′′refers to the largest index where y=C(i′′), and i′refers to the smallest index where
y=C(i′).
The following examples illustrate the diversity of cases that CPD can be applied to:
•Obtaining a two-sided symmetric prediction interval [Pϵ]for a chosen signifi-
cance level ϵ, can be done by [Pϵ]=[C⌊(ϵ/2)(q+1)⌋,C⌈(1−ϵ/2)(q+1)⌉]. Since the CPS
has guaranteed coverage, the expected error of the obtained interval will be ϵin
the long run.
•Still using the significance level ϵ, lower-bounded ( ⌊Pϵ⌋) and upper-bounded
(⌈Pϵ⌉) one-sided prediction interval can be obtained by ⌊Pϵ⌋=[C⌊ϵ(q+1)⌋,∞] and
⌈Pϵ⌉=[−∞,C⌈(1−ϵ)(q+1)⌉]. The coverage guarantees still apply.
•Similarly, a point prediction corresponding to the median P0.5of the distribution
can be obtained by P0.5=(C⌈0.5(q+1)⌉+C⌊0.5(q+1)⌋)/2. The median prediction can
be seen as a calibration of the underlying model’s prediction. Unless the model
is biased, the median will tend to be very close to the prediction of the underlying
model.
9
--- Page 10 ---
•Asymmetric intervals are obviously also possible, assigning any arbitrary per-
centiles as lower and upper bounds5.
•For a specific threshold t, the distribution can return the estimated probability
P(C≤t). Thus, it is possible to get the probability of the true target being below
the threshold t.
A CPS o ffers richer opportunities to define intervals and probabilities through query-
ing the CPD compared to conformal regression. A particular strength is the ability to
calibrate the underlying model. For example, if the underlying model is consistently
overly optimistic, the median from the CPS will adjust for that and provide a calibrated
prediction that is better adjusted to reality.
2.3. Uncertainty Estimation in Explanations
Uncertainty is an inherent aspect of all decisions and a key component of machine
learning methodology. In machine learning, uncertainty can be found both in the data
and in the model, resulting in predictions attached to a varying level of uncertainty.
Estimates of these di fferent types of uncertainty can o ffer critical insights into both the
reliability of the data, the model, and its predictions [50, 51]:
•Aleatoric (statistical) uncertainty represents the noise inherent in the data. It
affects the spread of probability distributions (for probabilistic outcomes) and
predictions (for regression). This uncertainty is irreducible because it reflects
limitations in the data generation process. Incorporating calibration ensures ac-
curate aleatoric uncertainty.
•Epistemic (systematic) uncertainty arises from the model’s lack of knowledge
due to limited training data or insu fficient complexity. It a ffects the confidence
of the model in its output when it encounters unfamiliar or out-of-distribution
data. Unlike aleatoric uncertainty, epistemic uncertainty is reducible - it can be
minimised by gathering more data, improving the model architecture, or refining
features.
5As this possibility is not referred to later in the paper, no specific notation is defined for this case.
10
--- Page 11 ---
There are di fferent approaches to quantifying uncertainty in models. The possi-
bilities of producing probability intervals in V A for each prediction can be used to
estimate the model uncertainty. The width of the intervals can be translated into the
level of uncertainty. Another approach is to use accuracy-rejection curves, which illus-
trate the accuracy of a predictor based on the percentage of rejections and the variance
to represent uncertainty [52].
In [53], di fferent techniques for calibrating uncertainty information are compared
and V A is identified as the preferred method for complementing predictions with a mea-
sure of uncertainty. The authors point out the simplicity of the V A approach, making it
preferable to the other calibration methods discussed in the study. Uncertainty is also
addressed in [36], where the authors develop a new method based on Naive Bayes. The
authors in [54] use Venn predictors to quantify the uncertainty of rule-based explana-
tions and highlight uncertainty quantification for additive feature importance methods
as an attractive focus for research.
2.4. Calibrated Explanations
Calibrated Explanations is a recently released local explanation method for classi-
fication [27] and regression [55] designed to enhance both the interpretability of model
predictions and the quantification of uncertainty. The method provides calibrated ex-
planations for both predictions and feature importance by quantifying aleatoric and
epistemic uncertainty.
By providing estimates for both aleatoric and epistemic uncertainty, Calibrated Ex-
planations o ffers a comprehensive understanding of predictions, both in terms of accu-
racy and confidence. This is particularly valuable in high-stakes environments where
model reliability and interpretability are essential, such as in healthcare, finance, and
autonomous systems.
Calibrated Explanations produce instance-based (local) explanations, and a fac-
tual explanation is composed of a calibrated prediction from the underlying model
accompanied by an uncertainty interval and a collection of factual feature rules , each
composed of a feature weight with an uncertainty interval and a factual condition , cov-
11
--- Page 12 ---
ering that feature’s instance value. It also enables exploring alternative explanations6
to provide insights about how changes to one or several features a ffect the calibrated
prediction and uncertainty interval. Alternative explanations only contain a collection
ofalternative feature rules , each composed of a prediction estimate with an uncer-
tainty interval and an alternative condition , covering alternative instance values for
the feature. For classification, the explanation explains the calibrated probability esti-
mate (and its level of uncertainty) for the positive class7. For regression, there are two
alternative use cases:
1. The standard regression explanation explains a calibrated estimate of the predic-
tion from the regressor, with a confidence interval covering the true target with a
user-assigned level of confidence.
2. The thresholded explanation explains the calibrated probability estimate (and its
level of uncertainty) for the calibrated estimate of the prediction being below a
user-given threshold.
Calibrated Explanations assume the existence of a predictive model h, trained using
the proper training set Zl, outputting a numeric value when predicting an object h(xi).
For classification, the model is a scoring classifier, producing probability estimates for
the positive class. For regression, it is an ordinary regressor predicting the expected
value.
The core of Calibrated Explanations relies on a numeric estimate and a lower and
an upper bound defining an uncertainty interval for the numeric estimate. As a conse-
quence, the algorithm is agnostic to whether it is a classification or regression problem,
as long as the numeric estimate and the lower and upper bound can be defined.
6In the initial version of Calibrated Explanations, as well as in earlier papers [27, 55, 56, 57], alternative
explanations were referred to as counterfactual explanations . As has been discussed above, this terminology
is too simplistic and somewhat misleading. Consequently, from this point on, such explanations will be
referred to as alternative explanations .
7For multi-class explanations, it is instead the probability estimate (and its level of uncertainty) for the
predicted class [57]. Whenever a reference is made to the positive class in the remainder of the paper, it
assumes binary classification and should be exchanged with the predicted class if working with multi-class
problems.
12
--- Page 13 ---
For classification, the probability estimate of the positive class is calibrated using a
V A calibrator [49], producing a lower and an upper bound for the calibrated probability
estimate (using a regularised mean of these bounds as the numeric estimate). For re-
gression, a CPS [58], producing a CPD, is used as a calibrator of the underlying model.
For the first regression use case, explaining the prediction value, the numeric estimate
is the median from the CPD, and the lower and upper bounds are represented by user-
selected percentiles in the CPD, defining the interval with guaranteed coverage. For
the second use case, explaining the probability of being below a user-given threshold,
the percentile in the CPD representing the threshold position is used as a probability
estimate (similar to classification) upon which a V A calibrator is applied.
As this paper is focusing on alternative explanations, Algorithm 1 provides a de-
scription of how alternative explanations are generated for a test object x8.
Categorical features produce one feature rule per alternative category. Numeric
features produce alternative features rules defining a higher (or lower) threshold than
the instance value. As an example, if test object xhas feature value petal width =1.7,
then two possible alternative feature rules could be petal width <1.6 and petal width
≥1.8. The scope of which possible feature values above or below the thresholds that
are covered is determined using a statistical sampling strategy described in more detail
in the original classification [27] and regression [55] papers.
One option that Calibrated Explanations allow is the possibility to combine al-
ternative explanations and get a conjunctive (combination of features) and calibrated
alternative explanation. Since only existing explanations are combined, the operation
is fairly e fficient, having only to perturb the test instance based on the rules being com-
bined and calibrate. The new explanation is composed as in Algorithm 1, with the two
rules being combined into a conjunction. This is an e fficient way to explore alternatives
even further but at the same time also creating a large number of additional alternative
explanations to consider.
8The index n+1 is omitted to reduce clutter.
13
--- Page 14 ---
Algorithm 1 Calibrated Explanations for alternative explanations
1:Input: Test object x, Calibrator
2:Output: Alternative explanation of x, calibrated numeric estimate φwith uncer-
tainty intervalh
φlow,φhighi
forx
3:To get a calibrated prediction and explanation for a test object x, apply a calibrator
to get a calibrated numeric estimate φand uncertainty intervalh
φlow,φhighi
. For
classification, the numeric estimate and uncertainty interval are defined by V A,
resulting in φ=Pandh
φlow=Plow,φhigh=Phighi
. For regression, the median P0.5
is used as numeric estimate ( φ=P0.5), and the intervalh
φlow,φhighi
is defined using
either a one-sided interval (usingh
φlow,φhighi
=⌊Pϵ⌋orh
φlow,φhighi
=⌈Pϵ⌉) or a
two-sided interval (using e.g.h
φlow,φhighi
=[Pϵ]), as described above.
4:foreach feature f∈F:do
5: Changing the value of feature f, one at a time in a systematic way,
producing slightly perturbed versions of object x, the calibrator can
be used to estimate the prediction φfand uncertainty intervals
h
φlow f,φhigh fi
.
6: The feature importance for feature fis defined as the di fference
between the calibrated prediction φ, achieved on the original object
x, and the estimated (averaged) calibrated prediction φf, achieved
on the perturbed versions of x.
7: The uncertainty intervals for the feature importance are defined
analogously by calculating the di fference between φand the
uncertainty intervalsh
φlow f,φhigh fi
for the perturbed versions of x.
8:end for
9:return The alternative explanation of xcomposed of the collection of alternative
feature rules composed of an alternative condition, defining the how it violates the
instance value, and an alternative numeric estimate φfwith uncertainty interval
h
φlow f,φhigh fi
. Furthermore, the calibrated numeric estimate φwith uncertainty
intervalh
φlow,φhighi
is also returned for reference.
14
--- Page 15 ---
3. Ensured Explanations - Conceptual Framework
Some of the fundamental aspects when explaining the outcome of a model is to be
able to answer the questions of whythe model has come to its conclusions and why not
another outcome. When adding uncertainty to the explanations, new questions arise,
such as how certain are you? . These question are answered in existing explanation
methods that include uncertainty (see, e.g. [25, 36, 27]). However, none of these
approaches addresses the question of how to reduce the uncertainty in a prediction,
how to get more certain or for short how to ensure?
Most existing explanation frameworks operate in the probability space (classifica-
tion) or the numeric prediction space (regression) and are evaluated in that dimension.
However, when uncertainty is introduced, another dimension needs to be considered.
This raises the question of how to incorporate uncertainty when ranking explanations
or feature weights. In the following, uncertainty Uis defined as the di fference between
the upper and lower bounds ( U=φhigh−φlow). First, we will examine the general case
of predictions and uncertainty, before we consider how this impacts explanations.
3.1. Probabilities and Uncertainty
Probabilistic predictions refer to classification but also to regression with thresh-
olds (P(y<t)). Probability ˆPis assumed to refer to the predicted class (which for
thresholded regression is ˆP=max(P(y<t),P(y≥t))) if nothing else is mentioned.
When considering predictions and uncertainty in probability space, both the probabil-
ity and uncertainty is bounded to [0 ,1]. In a simplistic view of traditional ML, where
uncertainty is not considered, a construed uncertainty interval would consist of a lower
and upper bound equal to the prediction, resulting in zero uncertainty. When adding an
uncertainty interval for the predicted probability, the maximum uncertainty covers the
entire probability range, resulting in an uncertainty of 1. Since the probability is the
mean (or regularised mean) of the lower and upper bound, maximum uncertainty would
result in a probability of 0 .5. Furthermore, when both the lower and upper bound are
either below or above 0 .5, the prediction is certain to be the positive class (if above 0 .5)
or the negative class (if below 0 .5). An interval covering e.g. [0 ,0.5] would have an
15
--- Page 16 ---
(a) Probability as mean of uncertainty bounds
 (b) Probability as regularised mean of uncertainty bounds
Figure 2: Probabilistic outcome with uncertainty
uncertainty of 0 .5 and a mean probability of 0 .25. However, when the interval covers
0.5, it is not clear which class to predict, since both classes are possible.
Figure 2a shows the possible outcomes when the mean of the intervals represents
the probability. The dark green area represents all probability intervals resulting in
the predicted class, the dark red area represents all probability intervals resulting in
changing prediction and the light-coloured area in the middle represents uncertain pre-
dictions. If only the probability is taken into account, the light-green area would be the
predicted class and the light-red area would change prediction. No explanation can fall
into the white areas.
Figure 2b shows the same plot for probabilities calculated as the regularised mean
(see Equation 2). Since the regularisation pushes all probabilities towards 0 .5, the
shape becomes somewhat skewed.
3.2. Explanations and Uncertainty
When considering explanations, we notice that there is some common ground be-
tween explanations of probabilistic predictions and numeric predictions (regression).
When discussing the common ground between explanations of both numeric and prob-
abilistic predictions, Explanations of outcome will be used. Figure 3 shows the com-
mon ground between all outputs when adding an uncertainty component. The basic
form of explanations can be divided into factual explanations, providing insights into
why an instance is predicted as it is, and exploring alternative explanations, providing
16
--- Page 17 ---
insights into what would have happened with alternative inputs. In both these forms of
explanations, an uncertainty component can be added, which Calibrated Explanations
provide an example of.
Explanations of outcome and uncertainty
Explain as it is
Factual uncertaintyExplore alternatives
Decreased uncertainty
Ensured explanationsIncreased uncertainty
Unsured explanations
Figure 3: The common structure of post-hoc explanations when adding uncertainty information to model
predictions.
For factual explanations, there is no need to delve deeper, since it provides an expla-
nation of the prediction. Thus, the predictions of individual instances can be mapped
to the framework described in Section 3.1 for probabilistic explanations.
The existing explanation types (such as counter-, semi-, and super-factuals) only
handle the prediction outcome. For example, if a doctor is trying to decide if a patient
has cancer or not and uses an AI model, it is critical that the doctor can get an answer
if and how it is possible to decrease the uncertainty. In other words, a new type of
explanation is needed that outlines how to achieve predictions with a higher level of
certainty. When looking solely at possible changes in uncertainty, the factual explana-
tion (see Figure 3) covers an explanation answering the question of the reasons behind
the existing outcome (as it is) including the factual uncertainty . Left to explore are
explanations that include decreasement ( Ensured ) and increasement ( Unsured ) of un-
certainty. With uncertainty, an explanation can not only change toward either a higher
or lower outcome. An explanation can also move towards ensured (lower uncertainty)
orunsured (higher uncertainty), where ensured explanations are generally desirable.
While explanation types o ffer a clear understanding of the movements along the out-
17
--- Page 18 ---
come axis, they do not regard how to change the uncertainty.
3.3. Exploring Alternative Explanations in Probability Space
When considering the exploration of alternative explanations, probabilistic expla-
nations open up some further considerations, whereas numeric predictions do not. The
reasons are the same as given in Section 3.1. When taking the uncertainty into account
for probabilistic explanations, Figure 2 provides a key to a categorisation of possible
explanations. In Figure 4, the di fferent possible kinds of explanations are shown.
Exploration of alternatives for probability and uncertainty
Change prediction
Counter-factual Uncertain
Counter-potential Semi-potential Super-potentialSame Prediction
Semi-factual Super-factual
Figure 4: Exploration of alternatives for probabilities and uncertainty.
Figure 5 provides an example where the factual probability of the prediction is
0.6, illustrating counter-factual (red), counter-potential (light red), semi-potential (light
yellow), semi-factual (yellow), super-potential (light green) and super-factual (green)
alternatives.
Clearly, all uncertain alternative explanations will be both counter-poten-tial and
semi-potential, as the definition of an uncertain alternative explanation is that the un-
certainty interval covers 0 .5. Super-potential explanations only exist when the lower
bound is lower than 0 .5 and the regularised mean is above the the predicted probabil-
ity. This means that it is only possible for predictions with a probability lower than
0.75 (or≈0.67 for regularised mean). For a predicted probability of exactly 0 .5, the
concepts of counter-, semi-, and super-explanations lose their meaning. We choose the
term potential for uncertain explanations, as it highlights the fact that they are more
18
--- Page 19 ---
(a) Probability as mean of uncertainty bounds
 (b) Probability as regularised mean of uncertainty bounds
Figure 5: Probabilistic outcome with uncertainty with counter-, semi- and super-potential explanations
likely to be e.g. a counter-explanation (if its regularised mean is indicating a changed
prediction), but they may potentially be something else.
3.4. Ranking Alternative Explanations
The exploration of alternatives may result in a substantial number of generated
explanations, especially if conjunctive rules are explored. Thus, having e fficient ways
of filtering out the most promising alternative explanations, taking both aleatoric and
epistemic uncertainty into account, is necessary. Or in other words, we need e fficient
ways of exploring ensured explanations.
There are two complementary approaches to ensured explanations. The first ap-
proach relies on an explicit filtering using the categories in Figure 4. Using this ap-
proach makes it possible to get e.g. all counter-explanations (i.e., all explanations
located in any of the red areas in Figure 5) or only the counter-factual explanations,
excluding any counter-potential explanations (i.e., only including the solid red areas in
Figure 5). This is a crude but often e ffective way of filtering according to a well es-
tablished and well-understood logic. However, it does not always make sense to make
such an explicit division, since this categorisation is based primarily on the aleatoric
scale, i.e., along the probability (or prediction) scale. Furthermore, even when using
such a division, we may still end up with too many alternatives to explore. Another
approach relies on ranking the explanations based on both aleatoric and epistemic un-
certainty, and this is where the notion of an ensured alternative comes into picture.
19
--- Page 20 ---
The goal of ensured alternatives is to identify alternatives that decrease the level
of epistemic uncertainty. This can be done explicitly, filtering out any alternative with
higher epistemic uncertainty. However, it may often be desirable to identify alternatives
in the lower right area in Figure 5 (if super-factual explanations are sought), decreasing
the epistemic uncertainty while at the same time increasing probability. Consequently,
there is a trade-o ffbetween the calibrated probability for the predicted class ( ˆP) and
uncertainty (U) when choosing the most suitable ensured explanation.
In order to handle the trade-o ffwhile at the same time allow the user to choose
between counter- and super-explanations, the following ranking metric is suggested:
rank =(1−|w|)·(1−U)+|w|·−ˆPifw<0,
ˆP otherwise,(5)
where|w|is the absolute value of the ranking weight w, which is bounded by −1≤
w≤1. A ranking weight w=0 means that alternative explanations are only ranked
based on uncertainty, with less uncertain explanations ranked higher. Both ranking
weight w=−1 and w=1 are ranked along ˆPalone, with positive weights ranking
explanations with increased belief in the predicted class higher and vice versa.
The figure shown in Figure 6 demonstrates how the ranking metric functions with
different weights. In the plot, dark blue represents lower ranks and yellow represents
higher ranks. The subplot in the middle illustrates how the ranking e ffectively pe-
nalises high epistemic uncertainty and treats instances along the probability axis with
equal emphasis when w=0. Conversely, the subplot on the right (and left) exclusively
penalises low (high) probability for the predicted class. In the second (fourth) subplot,
with a weight of w=−0.5 (w=0.5), an increase (decrease) in both epistemic uncer-
tainty and probability for the predicted class is penalised. Based on the assumption that
ensured explanations tend towards super-explanations, we recommend using a weight
of 0.5 to focus on both low epistemic uncertainty and high probability for the predicted
class.
20
--- Page 21 ---
Figure 6: The higher ranked (yellow) and lower ranked (dark blue) explanations using di fferent weights.
4. Experimental Setup
Two experiments were conducted to exemplify the number of alternative explana-
tions and how ensured explanations with the ranking metric can be used for decision-
making. Two datasets were used in the experiments, Wine and California housing.
The datasets are presented in Table 1, where #Attr. represents the number of attributes,
#Inst. the number of instances in the dataset, and Type the type of problem. The al-
ternative explanations were generated through experiments in which training and cali-
bration sets were randomly re-sampled before a random forest model was trained and
explained. The size of the calibration set was chosen to consist of 100 or 500 instances.
To catch variated situations, the experiments were either run for single feature expla-
nations or conjunctive explanations.
Table 1: Data sets used in the study.
Data set #Attr. #Inst. Type
Wine 11 4898 Classification
California Housing 10 20640 Regression
The package is available at github.com /Moffran/calibrated explanations and can be
installed using pipandconda .
5. Results
This section presents the experimental results, including the suggested ranking met-
ric for alternative explanations and the plots for ensured explanations in Calibrated
Explanations and how they can be used in decision-making.
21
--- Page 22 ---
5.1. Experimental Results
Tables 2 and 3 show the number of alternative explanations divided into di fferent
categories. The rows represent the number of calibration instances and whether it is al-
ternative explanations for single feature explanations ( s) or for conjunctive explanations
(c). The columns represent the total number of explanations, which can be split up in
counter-factual ( CoFa ), counter-potential ( CoPo ), semi-factual ( SeFa ), semi-potential
(SePo ), super-factual ( SuFa ), and super-potential ( SuPo ) explanations. Furthermore,
ensured ( Ens) explanations are the proportion of explanations having lower uncertainty.
The purpose of evaluating using di fferently many calibration instances is to show how
the epistemic uncertainty is a ffected by the calibration size.
Table 2: Wine - Number of alternative explanations.
Cal. Size Total CoFa CoPo SeFa SePo SuFa SuPo Ens
100 (s) 13.03 1.17 0.35 8.40 0.21 2.90 0.0 4.67
500 (s) 15.23 1.98 0.12 9.47 0.14 3.52 0.0 6.39
100 (c) 33.84 6.05 1.18 18.72 0.99 6.32 0.0 10.53
500 (c) 39.00 8.94 0.62 21.40 0.60 7.05 0.0 17.34
Table 3: California Housing - Number of alternative explanations.
Cal. Size Total CoFa CoPo SeFa SePo SuFa SuPo Ens
100 (s) 26.45 1.03 1.97 8.80 1.88 12.33 0.48 12.41
500 (s) 28.38 1.70 0.33 10.95 0.44 14.93 0.03 16.68
100 (c) 71.18 5.27 3.70 23.24 4.99 32.45 1.12 33.89
500 (c) 73.80 11.55 1.12 31.54 1.09 28.31 0.03 36.36
The number of alternative explanations is generally high, with a notable increase
for conjunctive explanations due to the number of possible combinations of features.
In addition, the number of alternative explanations increases slightly with an increment
in the number of instances in the calibration set. As expected, the number of uncer-
tain predictions is clearly a ffected by the calibration size, with a drastic increase in
potential-explanations for the smaller calibration set.
22
--- Page 23 ---
5.2. Ensured Explanations in Calibrated Explanations
In this section, a number of plots area presented, highlighting the challenge of a
multitude of alternative explanations and how our proposed approach for filtering out
ensured explanations can be used and uncerstood.
(a) Wine
 (b) California Housing, with threshold =500
Figure 7: Plot showing, on a global level, the instances in the test set and their placement in the probabili-
ty/uncertainty space for the Wine and California Housing data sets.
Let us first look at Figure 7a, which shows the entire test set for the wine data set.
It shows the position of each instance when both probability and epistemic uncertainty
are taken into account. The blue dots signify a prediction of class 0 and the red crosses
a prediction of class 1. This type of plot o ffers a direct global understanding of the
epistemic uncertainty variations in the underlying model and if there are some instances
that should be taken into consideration for further inspection. The instances show a
relatively low level of uncertainty (often below 0 .10), although there are a few instances
with a slightly higher level of uncertainty.
Figure 7b presents the same type of global plot as Figure 7a from the California
housing dataset. Since the target is numerical, a threshold value is set to be higher than
or below 500, which was found to be a good approximation of the median value. The
red crosses indicate that the predicted value is below 500 and the blue dots indicate that
it is equal to or above 500. Variations in epistemic uncertainty are more pronounced,
and some of the instances are around or above 0 .20.
Figure 8a shows an instance (red dot) in the Wine data set with a large number of
alternative explanations (blue dots), making it a challenge to distinguish and choose the
23
--- Page 24 ---
(a) Alternative explanations with conjunctions
 (b) Filter with weight =1
(c) Bar plot showing the explanations when filtering with weight =1
Figure 8: Instance from the Wine dataset, with all alternative explanations (8a) and with top ten explanations
with weight w=1 (8b and 8c)
best explanations. The plot clearly shows that almost all alternative explanations are
ensured, i.e. they reduce uncertainty. We use the ranking metric to find the ten explana-
tions with a focus ( w=1) on maximising the probability for the predicted class, which
results in Figure 8b. Figure 8c shows a bar plot with the rule conditions on the right
and the feature values to the left for the alternative explanations filtered in Figure 8b.
The lighter red area in the background is the original prediction for reference, where
the width indicates the uncertainty. The red bars correspond to the uncertainty interval
for the alternative prediction resulting from the alternative condition proposed to the
left.
Looking at both figures, it is possible to see that the metric has succeeded in ef-
fectively selecting the ten explanations that increase the likelihood of the prediction
24
--- Page 25 ---
(a) All alternative explanations with conjunctions
 (b) Filter with weight =0.5
(c) Bar plot showing the explanations when filtering with weight =0.5
Figure 9: Instance from the California Housing dataset, showing top five explanations with ranking method
w=0.5 and the threshold value of 300
the most. An interesting aspect is the blend of both conjunctive and single rules in the
filtering of explanations. One feature that stand out as especially crucial to decreasing
epistemic uncertainty in prediction is chlorides with a value below 0 .04. The feature
is primarily singled out at the top of the ranked explanations, existing in four out of
the ten most influential explanations. Moreover, the feature exists with the same rule
in three conjunctive rules, which further hints at its significance for the prediction’s
uncertainty. The answer on how to ensure the prediction of this instance is to decrease
the chlorides from 0 .06 to below 0 .04. By decreasing the chlorides, the probability will
increase simultaneously as the uncertainty decreases, resulting in a sharp prediction
with high probability and low epistemic uncertainty.
Figure 9 shows an instance from the California housing dataset with its alternative
explanations. The threshold in this example is set to 500, which means that the proba-
bility indicates whether the true target is below 500. An increase in probability in this
case means that a higher price is even less likely.
For this particular instance, with an already low uncertainty, the five explanations
25
--- Page 26 ---
(a) All alternative explanations
 (b) Filter with weight =0
(c) Filter with weight =1
 (d) Filter with weight =−0.5
Figure 10: Instance from the California housing dataset, with di fferent weights and the threshold value of
500, focusing on either the epistemic uncertainty, the probability, or a balance of them
that we filter out using the weight w=0.5 take into account both the probability and
epistemic uncertainty. The top ranked explanations dramatically increase the probabil-
ity. However, they slightly increase the uncertainty. The barplot shows that the third
explanation could be chosen if the lowered degree of epistemic uncertainty is preferred.
Figure 10 shows the results of an instance with an uncertainty of approximately
0.18 in the California housing dataset and the results when applying the suggested
metric with di fferent weights to rank alternative explanations of interest. There are a
notable number of alternative explanations for this case, where only one indicates a
higher uncertainty. We first apply a weight of 0 to rank the five alternatives with the
lowest epistemic uncertainty, resulting in 10b. Although it looks like there are only two
explanations, there are four explanations resulting in almost identical probability and
epistemic uncertainty. In this situation, primarily penalising the epistemic uncertainty,
26
--- Page 27 ---
(a) All counter-factual explanations
 (b) All super-factual explanations
(c) All semi-factual and -potential explanations
 (d) Filter explanations in 11c with weight =-1
Figure 11: The same instance from the California housing dataset as in Figure 10, explicitly filtering counter-
factual, semi-factual (with potential) and super-factual explanations
the probability increases simultaneously, resulting in suggestions of sharp explanations
with high probability. A slightly di fferent situation is seen in 10c, where the weight
of 1 only penalises low probability. Here, the result also includes those with a higher
uncertainty. Choosing a weight with 0 .5 would probably be very similar to choosing
a weight of 0. In 10d, the weight of −0.5 is chosen, penalising a high epistemic un-
certainty and high probability. The result is ensured explanations with low probability,
similar to ensured counter-factuals.
Figure 11 shows the same instance but using the filtering methods counter
explanations ,semi explanations , and super explanations , showing all such
alternative explanations. As mentioned earlier, when choosing a weight of −0.5 (seen
in 10d, in Figure 10) the result is similar to counter-factual explanations as seen in 11a,
in Figure 11. In 11b, all super-factual explanations are chosen. Although helpful, there
27
--- Page 28 ---
are a considerable number of alternative explanations. When filtering is combined
with ranking, an e fficient and dynamic tool is provided, enabling precise selection of
subsets of explanations. An example of this is shown in Figure 11d, showing the subset
of semi-explanations (shown in Figure 11c) closest to 0 .5.
In summary, the experimental findings presented in this study demonstrate that
multiple explanations frequently arise when exploring alternative explanations in order
to reduce epistemic uncertainty. This phenomenon was particularly pronounced when
allowing conjunctive explanations, due to the wide range of possible feature combi-
nations. These results highlight the necessity of an e ffective filtering mechanism to
identify the most optimal alternatives. To simplify filtering and o ffer the possibility to
rank the most e ffective ensured explanations, we introduce a metric designed to priori-
tise explanations based on epistemic uncertainty, probability, or a combination of both.
The ranking of alternative explanations in the experiments revealed that key features
often appeared in several of the top-ranked alternatives, encouraging deeper analysis
of the instances.
6. Conclusion
Incorporating epistemic uncertainty into explanation methods addresses a critical
challenge: understanding the confidence of the model in its predictions. Nevertheless,
a fundamental question remains unresolved — whether, and how, this uncertainty can
be reduced. Currently, no explanation type explicitly addresses this issue, and, to our
knowledge, no existing method o ffers guidance on which feature modifications might
decrease prediction uncertainty.
This paper introduces novel explanatory types that focus on epistemic uncertainty,
specifically:
•Ensured explanations : which highlight the specific feature changes necessary
to decrease epistemic uncertainty.
•Counter-potential explanations : which are uncertain alternative explanations
potentially changing prediction, with the uncertainty interval spanning 0 .5.
28
--- Page 29 ---
•Semi-potential explanations : which are uncertain alternative explanations po-
tentially likely not changing prediction, with the uncertainty interval spanning
0.5.
•Super-potential explanations : which are uncertain alternative explanations likely
increasing the belief in the predicted class, with the uncertainty interval spanning
0.5.
Our work underscores that epistemic uncertainty introduces a new dimension of
explanation quality. The evaluation of model trustworthiness now hinges not only on
shifts in prediction probability but also on the reduction of epistemic uncertainty. Navi-
gating the trade-o ffs between uncertainty, probability, and multiple competing explana-
tions is inherently complex. To address this, we propose a novel ranking metric called
ensured ranking , designed to aid in identifying the most reliable explanations.
Finally, to demonstrate the utility of ensured explanations, we have extended the
Calibrated Explanations method, incorporating visualisations that illustrate how vari-
ations in feature values influence epistemic uncertainty. This enhancement facilitates
a more comprehensive understanding of model behaviour, promoting appropriate trust
and interoperability.
Acknowledgements
The authors acknowledge the Swedish Knowledge Foundation and industrial part-
ners for financially supporting the research and education environment on Knowledge
Intensive Product Realisation SPARK at J ¨onk¨oping University, Sweden. Projects:
PREMACOP grant no. 20220187, AFAIR grant no. 20200223, and ETIAI grant no.
20230040.
Declaration of generative AI and AI-assisted technologies in the writing process
During the preparation of this work the author(s) used ChatGPT, Perplexity, and
Grammarly in order to brainstorm, improve language and style. After using these tool-
s/services, the author(s) reviewed and edited the content as needed and take(s) full
responsibility for the content of the published article.
29
--- Page 30 ---
References
[1] K. Devitt, M. Gan, J. Scholz, R. Bolia, A method for ethical ai in defence (2021).
[2] A. Albahri, A. M. Duhaim, M. A. Fadhel, A. Alnoor, N. S. Baqer, L. Alzubaidi,
O. Albahri, A. Alamoodi, J. Bai, A. Salhi, et al., A systematic review of trustwor-
thy and explainable artificial intelligence in healthcare: Assessment of quality,
bias risk, and data fusion, Information Fusion (2023).
[3] G. Malgieri, Automated decision-making in the eu member states: The right to
explanation and other “suitable safeguards” in the national legislations, Computer
law & security review 35 (5) (2019) 105327.
[4] High-Level Expert Group on AI, Ethics Guidelines for Trustworthy AI, Report,
European Commission, Brussels (Apr. 2019).
[5] R. Guidotti, A. Monreale, S. Ruggieri, F. Turini, F. Giannotti, D. Pedreschi, A
survey of methods for explaining black box models, ACM computing surveys
(CSUR) 51 (5) (2018) 1–42.
[6] J. van der Waa, E. Nieuwburg, A. Cremers, M. Neerincx, Evaluating xai: A com-
parison of rule-based and example-based explanations, Artificial intelligence 291
(2021) 103404.
[7] M. T. Ribeiro, S. Singh, C. Guestrin, ”Why Should I Trust You?”: Explaining the
Predictions of Any Classifier, in: Proceedings of the 22nd ACM SIGKDD, KDD
’16, 2016, p. 1135–1144.
[8] S. M. Lundberg, S.-I. Lee, A unified approach to interpreting model predictions,
in: Proceedings of the 31st international conference on neural information pro-
cessing systems, 2017, pp. 4768–4777.
[9] A. Holzinger, A. Saranti, C. Molnar, P. Biecek, W. Samek, Explainable ai
methods-a brief overview, in: International Workshop on Extending Explainable
AI Beyond Deep Models and Classifiers, Springer, 2020, pp. 13–38.
30
--- Page 31 ---
[10] S. Bach, A. Binder, G. Montavon, F. Klauschen, K.-R. M ¨uller, W. Samek, On
pixel-wise explanations for non-linear classifier decisions by layer-wise relevance
propagation, PloS one 10 (7) (2015) e0130140.
[11] D. Martens, P. Foster, Explaining data-driven document classifications, MIS
Quaterly 38 (1) (2014) 73–100.
[12] David Gunning, Explainable Artificial Intelligence, Web, DARPA (2017).
URL https://www.darpa.mil/attachments/XAIProgramUpdate.pdf
[13] Y . Zhang, X. Chen, Explainable recommendation: A survey and new perspec-
tives, arXiv preprint arXiv:1804.11192 (2018).
[14] F. Yang, Z. Huang, J. Scholtz, D. L. Arendt, How do visual explanations foster
end users’ appropriate trust in machine learning?, in: Proceedings of the 25th
International Conference on Intelligent User Interfaces, 2020, pp. 189–201.
[15] J. A. Alvarado-Valencia, L. H. Barrero, Reliance, trust and heuristics in judgmen-
tal forecasting, Computers in human behavior 36 (2014) 102–113.
[16] Z. Buc ¸inca, P. Lin, K. Z. Gajos, E. L. Glassman, Proxy tasks and subjective mea-
sures can be misleading in evaluating explainable ai systems, in: Proceedings of
the 25th international conference on intelligent user interfaces, 2020, pp. 454–
464.
[17] C. Molnar, Interpretable Machine Learning, 2nd Edition, 2022.
URL https://christophm.github.io/interpretable-ml-book
[18] M. Moradi, M. Samwald, Post-hoc explanation of black-box classifiers using con-
fident itemsets, Expert Systems with Applications 165 (2021) 113941.
[19] R. K. Mothilal, A. Sharma, C. Tan, Explaining machine learning classifiers
through diverse counterfactual explanations, in: Proceedings of the 2020 con-
ference on fairness, accountability, and transparency, 2020, pp. 607–617.
[20] R. Guidotti, Counterfactual explanations and how to find them: literature review
and benchmarking, Data Mining and Knowledge Discovery (2022) 1–55.
31
--- Page 32 ---
[21] S. Wachter, B. Mittelstadt, C. Russell, Counterfactual explanations without open-
ing the black box: Automated decisions and the gdpr, Harv. JL & Tech. 31 (2017)
841.
[22] R. McCloy, R. M. Byrne, Semifactual “even if” thinking, Thinking & reasoning
8 (1) (2002) 41–67.
[23] P. Clark, C. Booth, M. Rowlinson, S. Procter, A. Delahaye, Project hindsight:
Exploring necessity and possibility in cycles of structuration and co-evolution,
Technology Analysis & Strategic Management 19 (1) (2007) 83–97.
[24] P. Schwab, W. Karlen, Cxplain: Causal explanations for model interpretation un-
der uncertainty, Advances in neural information processing systems 32 (2019).
[25] U. Bhatt, J. Antor ´an, Y . Zhang, Q. V . Liao, P. Sattigeri, R. Fogliato, G. Melanc ¸on,
R. Krishnan, J. Stanley, O. Tickoo, et al., Uncertainty as a form of transparency:
Measuring, communicating, and using uncertainty, in: Proceedings of the 2021
AAAI /ACM Conference on AI, Ethics, and Society, 2021, pp. 401–413.
[26] G. Parmigiani, Measuring uncertainty in complex decision analysis models, Sta-
tistical methods in medical research 11 (6) (2002) 513–537.
[27] H. L ¨ofstr ¨om, T. L ¨ofstr ¨om, U. Johansson, C. S ¨onstr ¨od, Calibrated explanations:
With uncertainty information and counterfactuals, Expert Systems with Applica-
tions (2024) 123–154.
[28] Y . Romano, R. F. Barber, C. Sabatti, E. Cand `es, With malice toward none: As-
sessing uncertainty via equalized coverage, Harvard Data Science Review 2 (2)
(2020) 4.
[29] F. Wang, L. Cheng, R. Guo, K. Liu, P. S. Yu, Equal opportunity of coverage in
fair regression, Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 36 (2024).
[30] J. Antor ´an, U. Bhatt, T. Adel, A. Weller, J. M. Hern ´andez-Lobato, Getting a clue:
A method for explaining uncertainty estimates, arXiv preprint arXiv:2006.06848
(2020).
32
--- Page 33 ---
[31] U. Johansson, T. L ¨ofstr ¨om, Well-calibrated and specialized probability estima-
tion trees, in: Proceedings of the 2020 SIAM International Conference on Data
Mining, SIAM, 2020, pp. 415–423.
[32] J. Zhou, A. H. Gandomi, F. Chen, A. Holzinger, Evaluating the quality of ma-
chine learning explanations: A survey on methods and metrics, Electronics 10 (5)
(2021) 593.
[33] G. Phillips-Wren, M. Adya, Decision making under stress: The role of infor-
mation overload, time pressure, complexity, and uncertainty, Journal of Decision
Systems 29 (sup1) (2020) 213–225.
[34] C. Marx, Y . Park, H. Hasson, Y . Wang, S. Ermon, L. Huan, But are you sure? an
uncertainty-aware perspective on explainable ai, in: International Conference on
Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, PMLR, 2023, pp. 7375–7391.
[35] R. K. Singh, R. Gorantla, S. G. R. Allada, P. Narra, Skinet: A deep learning
framework for skin lesion diagnosis with uncertainty estimation and explainabil-
ity, Plos one 17 (10) (2022) e0276836.
[36] D. Slack, A. Hilgard, S. Singh, H. Lakkaraju, Reliable post hoc explanations:
Modeling uncertainty in explainability, Advances in neural information process-
ing systems 34 (2021) 9391–9404.
[37] F. R. Yapicioglu, A. Stramiglio, F. Vitali, Conformasight: Conformal prediction-
based global and model-agnostic explainability framework, in: World Conference
on Explainable Artificial Intelligence, Springer, 2024, pp. 270–293.
[38] S. Dandl, C. Molnar, M. Binder, B. Bischl, Multi-objective counterfactual ex-
planations, in: International conference on parallel problem solving from nature,
Springer, 2020, pp. 448–469.
[39] S. Verma, J. Dickerson, K. Hines, Counterfactual explanations for machine learn-
ing: A review, arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.10596 2 (2020) 1.
33
--- Page 34 ---
[40] A.-H. Karimi, B. Sch ¨olkopf, I. Valera, Algorithmic recourse: from counterfactual
explanations to interventions, in: Proceedings of the 2021 ACM conference on
fairness, accountability, and transparency, 2021, pp. 353–362.
[41] G. Maielli, Counterfactuals, superfactuals and the problematic relationship be-
tween business management and the past, Management & Organizational History
2 (4) (2007) 275–294.
[42] S. Aryal, M. T. Keane, Even if explanations: Prior work, desiderata & bench-
marks for semi-factual xai, arXiv preprint arXiv:2301.11970 (2023).
[43] E. Kenny, W. Huang, The utility of “even if” semifactual explanation to opti-
mise positive outcomes, Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 36
(2024).
[44] S. Aryal, M. T. Keane, Even-ifs from if-onlys: Are the best semi-factual expla-
nations found using counterfactuals as guides?, in: International Conference on
Case-Based Reasoning, Springer, 2024, pp. 33–49.
[45] V . V ovk, A. Gammerman, G. Shafer, Algorithmic Learning in a Random World,
Springer-Verlag, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2005.
[46] V . V ovk, J. Shen, V . Manokhin, M.-g. Xie, Nonparametric predictive distributions
based on conformal prediction, in: Conformal and probabilistic prediction and
applications, PMLR, 2017, pp. 82–102.
[47] B. Van Calster, D. J. McLernon, M. Van Smeden, L. Wynants, E. W. Steyerberg,
Calibration: the achilles heel of predictive analytics, BMC medicine 17 (1) (2019)
1–7.
[48] V . V ovk, G. Shafer, I. Nouretdinov, Self-calibrating probability forecasting, in:
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2004, pp. 1133–1140.
[49] V . V ovk, I. Petej, Venn-Abers predictors, arXiv preprint arXiv:1211.0025 (2012).
34
--- Page 35 ---
[50] E. H ¨ullermeier, W. Waegeman, Aleatoric and epistemic uncertainty in machine
learning: An introduction to concepts and methods, Machine learning 110 (3)
(2021) 457–506.
[51] V .-L. Nguyen, S. Destercke, E. H ¨ullermeier, Epistemic uncertainty sampling, in:
Discovery Science: 22nd International Conference, DS 2019, Split, Croatia, Oc-
tober 28–30, 2019, Proceedings 22, Springer, 2019, pp. 72–86.
[52] M. H. Shaker, E. H ¨ullermeier, Aleatoric and epistemic uncertainty with random
forests, in: 18th International Symposium on Intelligent Data Analysis, IDA
2020, Konstanz, Germany, Springer, 2020, pp. 444–456.
[53] T. Pereira, S. Cardoso, M. Guerreiro, S. C. Madeira, A. D. N. Initiative, et al.,
Targeting the uncertainty of predictions at patient-level using an ensemble of clas-
sifiers coupled with calibration methods, venn-abers, and conformal predictors: a
case study in ad, Journal of biomedical informatics 101 (2020) 103350.
[54] A. Alkhatib, H. Bostr ¨om, U. Johansson, Assessing explanation quality by venn
prediction, in: Conformal and Probabilistic Prediction with Applications, PMLR,
2022, pp. 42–54.
[55] T. L ¨ofstr ¨om, H. L ¨ofstr ¨om, U. Johansson, C. S ¨onstr ¨od, R. Matela, Calibrated ex-
planations for regression (2023). arXiv:2308.16245 .
[56] H. L ¨ofstr ¨om, T. L ¨ofstr ¨om, Conditional calibrated explanations: Finding a path
between bias and uncertainty, in: Explainable Artificial Intelligence, Springer
Nature Switzerland, Cham, 2024, pp. 332–355.
[57] T. L ¨ofstr ¨om, H. L ¨ofstr ¨om, U. Johansson, Calibrated explanations for multi-class,
V ol. 230 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, PMLR, 2024, pp. 175–
194.
[58] V . V ovk, I. Petej, I. Nouretdinov, V . Manokhin, A. Gammerman, Computation-
ally e fficient versions of conformal predictive distributions, Neurocomputing 397
(2020) 292–308.
35