
--- Page 1 ---
Fast Calibrated Explanations:
Efficient and Uncertainty-Aware Explanations
for Machine Learning Models
Tuwe L ¨ofstr ¨oma, Fatima Rabia Yapicioglub, Alessandra Stramigliob, Helena
L¨ofstr ¨oma, Fabio Vitalib
aJ¨ onk¨ oping AI Lab, Department of Computing, J¨ onk¨ oping University, J¨ onk¨ oping, Sweden
bDISI, Departement of Computer Science and Engineering, University of Bologna, Bologna, Italy
Abstract
This paper introduces Fast Calibrated Explanations, a method designed for generating
rapid, uncertainty-aware explanations for machine learning models. By incorporating
perturbation techniques from ConformaSight—a global explanation framework—into
the core elements of Calibrated Explanations (CE), we achieve significant speedups.
These core elements include local feature importance with calibrated predictions, both
of which retain uncertainty quantification. While the new method sacrifices a small
degree of detail, it excels in computational e fficiency, making it ideal for high-stakes,
real-time applications. Fast Calibrated Explanations are applicable to probabilistic ex-
planations in classification and thresholded regression tasks, where they provide the
likelihood of a target being above or below a user-defined threshold. This approach
maintains the versatility of CE for both classification and probabilistic regression, mak-
ing it suitable for a range of predictive tasks where uncertainty quantification is crucial.
Keywords: Uncertainty Quantification, Calibrated Explanations, ConformaSight,
Explainable AI
Email address: tuwe.lofstrom@ju.se (Tuwe L ¨ofstr ¨om)
Preprint submitted to Elsevier October 29, 2024arXiv:2410.21129v1  [cs.LG]  28 Oct 2024
--- Page 2 ---
1. Introduction
Artificial Intelligence (AI) is becoming an integral part of modern society, influenc-
ing everything from retail recommendations to medical diagnosis predictions [1, 2] and
even defence strategies [3]. In many predictive tasks, AI systems are typically devel-
oped as models trained via Machine Learning (ML) algorithms. While these models
often achieve remarkable accuracy, such as outperforming medical professionals in
cancer detection [4], they are neither flawless nor purely objective. Their performance
is inherently tied to the data and algorithms used for training, making the outcomes
sensitive to these factors.
As AI becomes more ubiquitous, the need for explainability in AI models has
grown. In high-stakes applications, such as healthcare or autonomous driving, it is
crucial that AI systems provide not only accurate predictions but also transparent rea-
soning behind those predictions. Explainable AI (XAI) aims to make AI’s decision-
making processes more understandable to humans, which enhances trust and facilitates
informed decision-making by users. Furthermore, explainable models allow develop-
ers and stakeholders to identify potential weaknesses, limitations, or unintended conse-
quences of the system. By providing insights into how the AI arrives at its conclusions,
XAI helps bridge the gap between complex model operations and human interpretabil-
ity, ultimately fostering more reliable and accountable AI systems across various do-
mains [5].
When making decisions based on Machine Learning (ML) models, it is essential
to account for the inherent uncertainty in their predictions [6, 7]. While many mod-
els provide point estimates, these alone fail to capture the degree of confidence in a
given prediction, which can be crucial, particularly in safety-critical applications. Un-
derstanding uncertainty helps quantify the reliability of the model’s output and aids in
making more informed decisions.
Uncertainty in ML models can generally be categorized into two types: aleatoric
and epistemic uncertainty [8]. Aleatoric uncertainty, also known as statistical or irre-
ducible uncertainty, arises from inherent noise in the data. It represents variability in
outcomes due to factors that cannot be explained by the model, such as measurement
2
--- Page 3 ---
errors or inherent randomness in the data-generating process. This type of uncertainty
cannot be reduced by gathering more data because it is intrinsic to the task.
In contrast, epistemic uncertainty reflects the model’s lack of knowledge, typically
caused by limited or insu fficient data. It is also known as reducible uncertainty be-
cause it can be decreased by acquiring more data or improving the model’s capacity.
Epistemic uncertainty is particularly important in situations where the model is making
predictions on out-of-distribution or novel examples—scenarios where the model may
be more prone to errors.
In light of these uncertainties, methods like Conformal Prediction (CP) [9] o ffer a
principled framework for uncertainty quantification. CP is a distribution-free, model-
agnostic approach that provides reliable confidence intervals for predictions. By not
assuming any particular distribution for the data, CP can generate prediction intervals
that account for both aleatoric and epistemic uncertainties, making it highly adaptable
across di fferent ML tasks and models.
Moreover, for classification tasks or probabilistic estimates, Venn Predictors, an ex-
tension of conformal prediction, are particularly useful. Venn Predictors provide a way
to output multiple probability estimates. Unlike typical methods that output a single
probability estimate (e.g., from softmax layers in neural networks), Venn Predictors
yield a set of probabilities that, based on the current available data, ensures one of the
probabilities will be correct. This added layer of uncertainty quantification o ffers more
robust probabilistic estimates, which can be crucial in risk-sensitive applications like
medical diagnostics or autonomous systems.
The strength of conformal methods, including Venn predictors, lies in their abil-
ity to complement standard ML outputs by o ffering uncertainty estimates that are both
mathematically rigorous and practically useful. This enhances the interpretability of
AI systems and provides decision-makers with a clearer understanding of the model’s
confidence, making these methods preferable for applications where understanding un-
certainty is as important as the prediction itself.
A natural development has been to integrate conformal methods into explanation
techniques, aiming to provide not only accurate predictions but also transparent and
trustworthy explanations. Calibrated Explanations [10] exemplify this approach by
3
--- Page 4 ---
embedding uncertainty directly into the explanation process through calibration. By
aligning the confidence of a model’s prediction with the reliability of its explanation,
this method are o ffering users a calibrated view of when the model’s reasoning can
be trusted. Calibrated Explanations provide local explanations with uncertainty quan-
tification of both prediction and feature importances for individual instances and is
applicable to both classification and regression.
Similarly, ConformaSight [11] builds on conformal prediction to provide a global
explanation framework. It ensures robust explanation sets with guaranteed coverage,
making it applicable across di fferent models and robust even in the presence of noisy
or perturbed data. This allows for consistent, high-confidence explanations, even in
unpredictable environments.
This paper aims to combine the strengths of local explanations from Calibrated
Explanations — which maintain applicability across classification and thresholded re-
gression scenarios — with the perturbation approach employed in ConformaSight.
Specifically, we preserve the flexibility of explaining predictions for both classifica-
tion and thresholded regression outputs (e.g., explaining the probability of exceeding a
threshold). This is enhanced by incorporating ConformaSight’s perturbation approach,
enabling the generation of computationally e fficient factual explanations providing fea-
ture importance.
The resulting approach o ffers extremely fast explanations that can be highly advan-
tageous in real-time decision-making processes, particularly where the outputs of these
explanations are fed into subsequent steps or systems. Performance is essential for
scenarios like machine teaching [12, 13], where explanation algorithms are required to
function in real-time, ideally on resource-constrained platforms such as mobile devices.
In scenarios requiring critical decisions within a short time frame, such as emergency
response or automated monitoring, the ability to generate explanations quickly ensures
that the system can continue operating seamlessly. Essentially, these fast explanations
become an integral part of a continuous decision-making loop, where real-time in-
sights flow directly into other processes for immediate action. Additionally, this could
especially be crucial in time-series or sequential data tasks, where the significance of
features may shift dynamically across di fferent time points. In such cases, generating
4
--- Page 5 ---
a single static explanation for an entire series would be misleading, as the importance
of each feature evolves over time. Hence, fast calibrated explanations can adapt to the
changing context at each timestamp to ensure more accurate insights, enhancing the
reliability of real-time predictive models.
In addition to delivering rapid explanations with feature importance, it also quanti-
fies uncertainty for both the overall prediction and the individual contribution of each
feature. This allows decision-makers to interpret not only the model’s output but also
the reliability of each contributing factor, providing deeper insights for risk-sensitive
applications where understanding both prediction and explanation uncertainty is criti-
cal.
In the next section, thorough descriptions of the building blocks for this paper are
provided. In Section 3, our contribution is described. The experimental setup is de-
scribed in Section 4 whereas the results provide both evaluation results and a demon-
stration of its applicability. Section 6 wraps up the paper with a concluding discussion
and pointers for future work.
2. Background
2.1. Post-Hoc Explanation Methods
In machine learning (ML), there are two main approaches to generating explana-
tions. One method involves using inherently interpretable and transparent models, also
known as Interpretable AI, which describes the internals of a system in a way that is
understandable to humans [14]. Alternatively, post-hoc techniques can be used to ex-
plain complex models, making them suitable for explaining black-box models as well
[15].
Post-hoc explanations involve creating simpler models that clarify how a complex
model’s predictions are linked to input features. These explanations can be either local,
focusing on a single instance, or global, providing insights into the overall model. They
often incorporate visual aids like feature importance plots, pixel representations, or
word clouds to emphasize the key features, pixels, or words influencing the model’s
predictions. The importance of making black-box models explainable is highlighted
5
--- Page 6 ---
by [16], which discusses various interpretability methods for machine learning models.
Moradi et al. [17] propose the Confident Itemsets Explanation (CIE) method, which
uses highly correlated feature values to explain black-box classifiers by discretizing the
decision space into smaller subspaces. Another interesting approach is introduced by
[18], which focuses on the quality of explanations in AI systems, particularly in the
medical field, by introducing the concept of causability in addition to explainability.
Research on proposed post-hoc methods is diverse and frequently tailored to spe-
cific tasks. For instance, [19] provides a visual explanation of black-box models by lo-
calizing the region responsible for a prediction. This approach is tested on a classifica-
tion task by localizing entire object classes within an image. Another popular approach
is the use of counterfactual explanations, which, similar to perturbation methods, vary
the input space to understand how it a ffects the output. This approach, employed in a
statistical fashion, is used by [20] to produce human-friendly interpretations on classi-
fication tasks.
Post-hoc explanations for classification and regression have some distinguishing
characteristics due to the nature of the insights they o ffer. In classification, explana-
tions involve predicting the class an instance belongs to from predefined classes, with
probability estimates reflecting the model’s confidence for each class. Techniques like
SHAP [21], LIME [22], and Anchor [23] explore factors contributing to class assign-
ment, often using feature importance, such as words in textual data or pixels in images.
However, both SHAP and LIME can also be used to generate explanations for regres-
sion models. In regression, the focus is on predicting numerical values associated with
instances without predefined classes. Explanations for regression models normally
adapt techniques designed for classifiers by attributing features to predicted outputs.
Local explanations in classification often rely on probability estimates, which most
machine learning models can generate to indicate the likelihood of each class. These
probability estimates are commonly interpreted as a measure of prediction confidence.
For example, in a binary classification scenario, a model predicting an instance belong-
ing to the positive class with a probability estimate of 0.8 is considered more confident
than one predicting the same instance with a probability estimate of 0.65. Probability
estimates form the basis for local explanations in classification tasks, where the con-
6
--- Page 7 ---
fidence level indicates the likelihood of the positive class being the true class for that
instance.
2.2. Calibration and Uncertainty Quantification
Basing decisions on accurate information is crucial in decision-making, placing
an additional layer of requirements on predictive models to provide well-calibrated
predictions and guarantees.
Conformal Prediction (CP) [9] is a distribution-free framework that o ffers pre-
diction regions with guaranteed coverage, whose value and e ffectiveness have been
demonstrated in numerous studies [24] [25]. Errors occur when the true target falls
outside the predicted region. However, conformal predictors maintain automatic valid-
ity under exchangeability, resulting in an error rate of ϵover time. Conformal regres-
sion (CR) provides prediction intervals with user-decided guaranteed coverage, and
conformal predictive systems (CPS) [26] provide a conformal predictive distribution
(CPD). The CPDs can be queried for intervals with guaranteed coverage, similar to
but more dynamic than CR. This is done by defining intervals based on percentiles in
the distribution so that a symmetric interval with 90% coverage can be achieved using
the percentiles [5,95]. The CPDs can also be queried for the probability of the actual
instance value being below a user-given threshold, corresponding to the percentile of
the threshold value in the distribution.
For classification, the focus is generally on the calibration of the probability esti-
mates produced by the classifier, which can be defined as follows:
p(c|pc)≈pc, (1)
where pcrepresents the probability estimate for a particular class label c. This means
that a well-calibrated model produces predicted probabilities that match observed accu-
racy. Consequently, whenever a model assigns a probability estimate of 0 .9 to a label,
the accuracy for that label should be approximately 90%.
It is well-known that many predictive models produce poorly calibrated probability
estimates [27]. An external calibration method can be applied to calibrate a poorly
7
--- Page 8 ---
calibrated model using a separate portion of the labelled data, called the calibration set,
to adjust the predicted probabilities.
The CP framework defines Venn [28] and Venn-Abers (V A) [29] predictors that
produce multi-probabilistic predictions in the form of confidence-based probability in-
tervals. Venn prediction involves a Venn taxonomy, categorising calibration data for
probability estimation. The estimated probability for test instances falling into a cat-
egory is the relative frequency of each class label among all calibration instances (in-
cluding the test instance) in that category. Defining a proper Venn taxonomy can be
challenging, which is the strength of V A.
2.2.1. Venn-Abers Calibration
V A Calibration o ffer automated taxonomy optimisation using isotonic regression,
resulting in dynamic probability intervals for binary classification. Since the proba-
bility interval includes the well-calibrated probability estimates for the true class label
being both negative (lower bound) and positive (upper bound), and the instance must
be one or the other, it follows that the interval must contain the true probability. The
problem from a predictive perspective is that the true class label is not known. How-
ever, the width and location of the interval can provide a lot of information. A smaller
interval indicates higher certainty about the prediction, while a larger interval indicates
more uncertainty. Since it is often impractical to have only an interval to indicate the
probability estimate of the positive class, it is common to use a regularisation of the
interval as an estimate for the positive class.
To define a V A predictor predicting a test object xn+1, letZ={z1,..., zn}, where n=
l+q, be a training set. Each instance zi=(xi,yi) consists of two parts, an object xiand a
target yi. Normally, calibration requires a separate calibration set, motivating a split of
the training set into a proper training set Zlwith linstances and a calibration set Zq=
{z1,..., zq}1. A scoring classifier is trained on Zlto compute sfor{x1,..., xq,xn+1}.
The score sis defined as the probability estimate for the positive class from a classifier
1As we assume random ordering, the calibration set is indexed 1 ,..., qrather than l+1,..., n, for indexing
convenience.
8
--- Page 9 ---
h. Inductive V A prediction follows these steps:
1. Use{(s1,y1),..., (sq,yq),(sn+1,yn+1=0)}to derive the isotonic calibrator g0and
use{(s1,y1),..., (sq,yq),(sn+1,yn+1=1)}to derive the isotonic calibrator g1.
2. The probability interval for yn+1=1 is defined as [ g0(sn+1),g1(sn+1)] (hereafter
referred to as [ plow,phigh], representing the lower and upper bounds of the inter-
val).
3. The regularised probability estimate for yn+1=1, minimising the log loss [29],
can be defined as:
p=phigh
1−plow+phigh(2)
In summary, V A produces a calibrated (regularised) probability estimate ptogether
with a probability interval with a lower and upper bound [ plow,phigh].
2.2.2. Conformal Predictive Systems
Conformal Predictive Systems produce CPDs for each test object xn+1when the
target domain is numeric (i.e. regression). To define a CPS, assume the existence of
an underlying regression model htrained using Zl. Like all conformal predictors, CPS
relies on nonconformity scores α, defining the strangeness of an instance. Unlike CR,
where the nonconformity is usually defined as the absolute error αi=|yi−h(xi)|, CPS
defines nonconformity using the signed errors αi=yi−h(xi). The prediction for a test
instance xn+1then becomes the following CPD:
CPD (y)=i+τ
q+1,ify∈ C(i),C(i+1),fori∈{0,...,q}
i′−1+(i′′−i′+2)τ
q+1,ify=C(i),fori∈{1,...,q}(3)
where C(1),..., C(q)are obtained from the calibration scores α1,...,α q, sorted in in-
creasing order:
C(i)=h(xn+1)+αi (4)
with C(0)=−∞andC(q+1)=∞. In case of a tie, τis sampled from the uniform
distribution U(0,1), and its role is to allow the p-values of target values to be uniformly
distributed, i′′is the highest index such that y=C(i′′), while i′is the lowest index such
thaty=C(i′).
9
--- Page 10 ---
The following cases provide some further intuition on how a CPD can be used:
•Obtaining a two-sided symmetric prediction interval for a chosen significance
levelϵcan be done by [ C⌊(ϵ/2)(q+1)⌋,C⌈(1−ϵ/2)(q+1)⌉]. Since the CPS has guaran-
teed coverage, the expected error of the obtained interval will be ϵin the long
run. Asymmetric prediction intervals are possible by selecting percentiles for the
lower ( plow) and higher ( phigh) bounds of the interval. The guaranteed coverage
of the interval will be ϵ=phigh−plow.
•Still using the significance level ϵ, a lower-bounded one-sided prediction interval
can be obtained by [ C⌊ϵ(q+1)⌋,∞], and an upper-bounded one-sided prediction in-
terval can be obtained by [ −∞,C⌈(1−ϵ)(q+1)⌉]. The coverage guarantees still apply.
•Similarly, a point prediction corresponding to the median of the distribution can
be obtained by ( C⌈0.5(q+1)⌉+C⌊0.5(q+1)⌋)/2. The median prediction can be seen as
a calibration of the underlying model’s prediction. Unless the model is biased,
the median will tend to be very close to the prediction of the underlying model.
•For a specific threshold t, the distribution can return the estimated probability
p(C≤t). Thus, it is possible to get the probability of the true target being below
the threshold t.
A CPS o ffers richer opportunities to define intervals and probabilities through query-
ing the CPD compared to CR. A particular strength is the ability to calibrate the under-
lying model. For example, if the underlying model is consistently overly optimistic,
the median from the CPS will adjust for that and provide a calibrated prediction that is
better adjusted to reality.
2.3. Calibrated Explanations
Calibrated Explanations is a recently released2local explanation method support-
ing both classification and regression, providing feature importance with uncertainty
2Calibrated Explanations can be installed using, e.g., pip install calibrated-explanations or
accessed at github.com /Moffran/calibrated explanations.
10
--- Page 11 ---
quantification [10, 30]. Calibrated Explanations produce instance-based explanations,
and a factual explanation is composed of a calibrated prediction from the underly-
ing model accompanied by an uncertainty interval and a collection of factual feature
rules , each composed of a feature weight with an uncertainty interval and a factual
condition , covering that feature’s instance value. Calibrated Explanations support both
binary and multi-class classification. In binary classification, the explanation explains
the calibrated probability estimate (and its level of uncertainty) for the positive class,
whereas in multi-class classification, the most probable class (after calibration) is con-
sidered the positive class and all other classes are treated as the negative class, i.e., not
the predicted class. For regression, there are two alternative use cases:
1. The regression explanation explains a calibrated estimate of the prediction from
the regressor, with a confidence interval covering the true target with a user-
assigned level of confidence.
2. The thresholded explanation explains the calibrated probability estimate (and its
level of uncertainty) for the calibrated estimate of the prediction being below a
user-given threshold.
The algorithm’s core is agnostic to whether it is a classification or regression prob-
lem since it is defined based on a numeric estimate and a lower and an upper bound
defining an uncertainty interval for the numeric estimate. For classification, the proba-
bility estimate for the positive class is calibrated using a V A calibrator [29], producing
a lower and an upper bound for the calibrated probability estimate (using a regularised
mean of these bounds as the numeric estimate). For regression, a Conformal Predic-
tive System (CPS) [31], producing a Conformal Predictive Distribution (CPD), is used
as a calibrator of the underlying model. For the first use case, explaining the predic-
tion value, the numeric estimate is the median from the CPD, and the lower and upper
bounds are represented by user-selected percentiles in the CPD, defining the interval
with guaranteed coverage. For the second use case, explaining the probability of be-
ing below a user-given threshold, the percentile in the CPD representing the threshold
position is used as a probability estimate (similar to classification) upon which a V A
calibrator is applied. For details on how thresholded regression works, see the original
11
--- Page 12 ---
regression paper by L ¨ofstr ¨om et al. [30].
Calibrated Explanations assume the existence of a predictive model h, trained using
the proper training set Zl, outputting a numeric value when predicting an object h(xi).
For classification, the model is a scoring classifier, producing probability estimates
for the positive class. For regression, it is an ordinary regressor predicting the expected
value. Algorithm 1 describes how Calibrated Explanations creates a factual explanation
ofx3.
For further details on the algorithm and how it is applied to classification and the
two use cases for regression, see [10] and [30].
2.4. Perturbation Based Explanations
Yapicioglu et al. [11] presents ConformaSight, a unique explanation approach based
on conformal prediction methodology that provides insightful and resilient explana-
tions regardless of the underlying data distribution. Its purpose is to give explanations
for set-type predictions that conformal predictors create. ConformaSight highlights the
influence of the calibration process on prediction outputs, in contrast to conventional
explanation approaches that mainly concentrate on feature importance.
In classification tasks, it is essential to understand the factors that influence the for-
mation of prediction sets within conformal prediction frameworks to enhance model in-
terpretability and trust[32]. Analyzing metrics such as weighted coverage and weighted
set size provides valuable insights into the model’s uncertainty representation [33].
Weighted coverage measures the proportion of instances that are correctly classified
and included within prediction sets, thereby indicating the model’s reliability in identi-
fying uncertain regions relative to class distribution [34]. On the other hand, weighted
set size o ffers critical information about the granularity of uncertainty representation,
reflecting the average number of instances within prediction sets while accounting for
class imbalance. By examining these metrics, researchers can gain a deeper under-
standing of the relationship between model predictions and input features.
3The index n+1 is omitted to reduce clutter.
12
--- Page 13 ---
Algorithm 1 Factual Calibrated Explanations
1:Input: Fitted model h, calibrator, test object x
2:Output: Factual explanation of x
3:ifClassification then
4: Use V A as calibrator to produce calibrated probability estimate φ=pand
uncertainty intervalh
φlow=plow,φhigh=phighi
.
5:end if
6:ifRegression then
7: Use CPS as calibrator and let φbe the median andh
φlow,φhighi
is either a
one- or two-sided interval as described above.
8:end if
9:foreach feature f∈Fdo
10: Changing the value of feature f, one at a time in a systematic way, producing
slightly perturbed versions of object x, the calibrator can be used to estimate
the (averaged) prediction φfand uncertainty intervalsh
φlow f,φhigh fi
.
11: The feature importance for feature fis defined as the di fference between the
calibrated prediction φ, achieved on the original object x, and the estimated
(averaged) calibrated prediction φf, achieved on the perturbed versions of x.
12: The uncertainty intervals for the feature importance are defined analogously by
calculating the di fference between φand the uncertainty intervals
h
φlow f,φhigh fi
for the perturbed versions of x.
13: A factual feature rule is formed, with a factual condition defined as
feature = categorical instance value , for categorical features, or
feature≤threshold orfeature>threshold , for numerical features.
Thethreshold is defined so that the factual condition incorporates the
numerical instance value for that feature. Since the factual condition must
always include the feature value, only one factual condition is formed for each
feature.
14:end for
15:return A factual explanation, composed of a calibrated prediction φfrom the un-
derlying model accompanied by an uncertainty intervalh
φlow,φhighi
and the col-
lection of factual feature rules .
13
--- Page 14 ---
Furthermore, ConformaSight focuses on how the calibration process a ffects pre-
diction intervals, which goes beyond conventional feature importance explanations. A
feature in the calibration set is important in influencing the model’s confidence in its
predictions when it has a significant impact on the coverage of these intervals. This
method takes advantage of the finding that, when the conformal prediction algorithm
is run multiple times with distinct calibration datasets, the coverage will di ffer over a
limitless number of validation points and yet satisfy the 1 −α(error rate) minimum
coverage requirement [35]. This variability highlights the significance of some proper-
ties in the calibration set, especially those that have a large impact on the coverage of
prediction intervals, suggesting that these factors are critical in determining the model’s
level of confidence in its predictions.
As a result, ConformaSight provides explanations that highlight the significance of
features as well as the calibration process’s impact on forecast accuracy. Metrics like
weighted coverage andweighted set size are used to achieve this; they are particularly
useful in conformal classification situations [9], o ffering a more thorough comprehen-
sion of the dynamics of the model.
Central to ConformaSight is the idea of leveraging distributional changes within
the calibration set to systematically detect variations that highlight feature importance.
These changes are introduced through perturbations, mathematically defined in Sec-
tions 2.4.1, 2.4.2, and 2.4.3.
2.4.1. Definition 1: Permutation-based Perturbations
Let the set of categorical features be represented by CF. Let xCfrepresent a categor-
ical feature with cdifferent categories for each Cf∈CF. By arbitrarily permuting the
values of x′
Cfktimes, the permutation-based perturbation function permute( xCf,k)
creates a perturbed variant of xCf, called x′
Cf. Formally, this procedure can be explained
as:
x′
Cf=permute (xCf,k) (5)
14
--- Page 15 ---
2.4.2. Definition 2: Gaussian Noise Perturbations
Define the set of numerical characteristics by NF. Consider a numerical feature
xNfwith a standard deviation σfor each Nf∈NF. The Gaussian noise perturbation
algorithm takes a severity parameter sand adds noise to xNf, sampled from a normal
distribution; this produces the perturbed feature x′
Nf. Theoretically this procedure is
defined as:
x′
Nf=xNf+η(s),whereη(s)∼Normal (0,s×σ) (6)
2.4.3. Definition 3: Uniform Noise Perturbations
The uniform noise perturbation function adds noise from a uniform distribution to
a numerical feature xNf. The definition of the perturbed feature x′
Nfgiven a severity
parameter sis as outlined below:
x′
Nf=xNf+η(s),whereη(s)∼Uniform (−s×RNf,s×RNf) (7)
where RNfrepresents the range of values in xNf. The uniform noise perturbation
introduces variability across the dataset, facilitating the exploration of various distribu-
tional shifts.
By implementing these perturbations on a feature-by-feature basis, ConformaSight
assesses the changes in the model’s behavior relative to the original calibration set. This
alteration acts as a measure of each feature’s significance, o ffering enhanced insights
into how individual features impact the model’s predictions.
3. Proposed Solution
This paper aims to incorporate the perturbation approach, constituting a core ele-
ment in ConformaSight, into the explanation method Calibrated Explanations, making
it possible to extract a new form of explanations, providing fast feature importance
generation without rule conditions.
As described in 2.3, perturbations are done for each feature of the test instance at
explanation time in Calibrated Explanations. The solution that we propose in this paper
15
--- Page 16 ---
performs all perturbations on the calibration set at initialisation of the Fast Calibrated
Explanations, resulting in some additional overhead once when initialising Fast Cali-
brated Explanations, while avoiding any perturbations at explanation time. Compared
to the explanations in Calibrated Explanations, a main di fference with the solution pro-
posed here is that there is no rule conditions. Instead, each feature is assigned a feature
weight determining the relative importance of that feature compared to other features.
As such, the provided explanations are factual, conveying the feature importance per
instance. The resulting solution provides very fast explanations with feature weights
that can be analysed per instance.
More formally, the solution that we propose can be divided into two stages: 1)
initialisation, and 2) explanation. The initialisation stage 1) is described in Algorithm 2
while the explanation stage 2) is described in Algorithm 3.
Algorithm 2 Initialisation of Fast Calibrated Explainer
1:Input: Calibration set Zq, factor k, severity s, noiseη
2:Output: An initialised Fast Calibrated Explainer
3:Multiply Zqwith factor kresulting in Zq=[Zq]k
i=1
4:foreach feature f∈Fdo
5: Permute the kcopies of Xfto create a permuted X′
fusing Equation (5), (6),
or (7).
6: Initiate a calibrator Cfusing the multiplied calibration set Zq, substituting the
koriginal XfwithX′
f. The kind of calibrator is either a V A for classification or
a combination of CPS and V A for thresholded regression explanations.
7:end for
8:Initiate a base calibrator Cusing the original calibration set Zq
9:return A new Fast Calibrated Explainer with all permutations and calibrators
stored
Since the perturbation is performed at initialisation and is using a CPD when used
for regression, all explanations from a single model that use the same uncertainty in-
terval, i.e., the same percentiles, will result feature weights that have exactly the same
size in relation to all other feature weights. The only thing that will di ffer from instance
16
--- Page 17 ---
Algorithm 3 Explanation using Fast Calibrated Explainer
1:Input: An initialised Fast Calibrated Explainer, a test object x
2:Output: An explanation of x
3:Use the base calibrator Cto produce calibrated estimate φand uncertainty interval
h
φlow,φhighi
forx.
4:foreach feature f∈Fdo
5: Estimate the prediction φfand uncertainty intervalsh
φlow f,φhigh fi
usingCf.
6: The feature weights for feature fis defined as the di fference between the
calibrated prediction φ, achieved on the original object x, and the estimated
(averaged) calibrated prediction φf.
7: The uncertainty intervals for the feature weights are defined analogously by
calculating the di fference between φand the uncertainty intervals
h
φlow f,φhigh fi
.
8:end for
9:return An explanation, composed of a calibrated prediction φfrom the underlying
model accompanied by an uncertainty intervalh
φlow,φhighi
and the collection of
feature weights with feature weight uncertainties .
17
--- Page 18 ---
to instance is the scale of the feature weights, making Fast Calibrated Explanations for
standard regression clearly less useful. The same issue does not exist for probabilistic
explanations (applicable to both classification and thresholded regression).
The similarities and di fferences between Calibrated Explanations and Fast Cali-
brated Explanations are summarised in Table 1.
4. Experimental Setup
The evaluation is divided into two parts. The first part contains a comparative eval-
uation between the Fast Calibrated Explanations, our proposed solution, and Calibrated
Explanations on classification and regression problems. The evaluation is performed
separately for classification and regression, focusing on complementary aspects. For
code, see the calibrated explanations /evaluation /FastCE folder in the repository.
For classification, an ablation study of the impact from possible permutation param-
eters is performed. The evaluation covers both computational cost and how the mean
variance of feature weights vary across di fferent parameter settings. The ablation study
includes various parameter values for the Fast Calibrated Explanations including both
forms of noise type ( uniform andgaussian ), four di fferent scaling factors (1 ,3,5,10),
and five di fferent severity values (0 ,0.25,0.5,0.75,1). Computational time and mean
variance per feature importance is reported for 25 binary classification data sets. Each
data set was split into 50% training data, 25% calibration data and 25% test data and
the underlying model was a RandomForestClassifier with 100 trees4.
For regression, focus is on computational speed, stability and robustness in compar-
ison with SHAP and LIME applied on calibrated models (using the CPS as calibrator of
the underlying model). All target values were min-max normalised to the range [0 ,1].
Each data set was split using 200 calibration instances, 100 test instances, and the re-
maining instances as training set. For each one of the 31 data sets, six di fferent setups
where evaluated, three for standard regression and two for thresholded regression (us-
ing 0.5 as threshold). Two setups applied SHAP and LIME on a calibrated model, two
4To run the classification experiment, run first Perturbation Experiment Ablation.py to generate results
and then run the notebook Perturbation Analysis Times.ipynb .
18
--- Page 19 ---
Table 1: Comparison between Calibrated Explanations and Fast Calibrated Explanations
Calibrated Explanations Fast Calibrated Explanations
Perturbation Perturbation is done at explanation time
on the test instancePerturbation is done at initialisation
time on the calibration set, requiring ad-
ditional memory space for the perturbed
calibration set
Expressiveness Each rule contains a condition for which
the feature weight appliesNo condition is used, with the implica-
tion that the feature weight is less ex-
pressive
Interpretation Each rule condition clearly convey when
the feature weight apply, providing clear
cues for interpretationThe feature weights provide insights on
how much and in which direction a fea-
ture a ffects the prediction, with positive
weights favouring the positive class and
vice versa
Regression Supports both standard regression and
thresholded regressionIs only clearly useful for thresholded re-
gression
Uncertainty Uncertainty quantification is provided
for both prediction and feature weightsUncertainty quantification is provided
for both prediction and feature weights
Alternatives Alternative explanations, indicating
what prediction the model would output
if the feature is altered in accordance
with the condition, can be extractedNo alternative explanations can be ex-
tracted
Conjunctions Conjunctive explanations, indicating the
joint impact from several conditional
rules, are possibleNo conjunctions are available
Speed Since perturbations are done on the test
instance and since a suitable rule condi-
tion must be identified, the explanation
time is penalisedSince all perturbations have already
been done on the calibration set and no
condition is used, explanations can be
generated much faster
19
--- Page 20 ---
setups used Calibrated Explanations for standard and thresholded regression and two
setups used Fast Calibrated Explanations for standard and thresholded regression. Fast
Calibrated Explanations is evaluated for standard regression, to indicate the potential
for that kind of context, even though these explanations are deemed less useful. The
underlying model was a RandomForestRegressor which was calibrated using a CPS,
either explicitly (for LIME and SHAP) using the ConformalPredictiveSystem class
from crepes or implicitly as part of using the CalibratedExplainer class5. The fol-
lowing metrics are evaluated:
•Stability means that multiple runs on the same instance and model should pro-
duce consistent results. Stability is evaluated by generating explanations for
the same predicted instances 5 times with di fferent random seeds (using the
iteration counter as random seed). The random seed is used to initialise the
numpy.random.seed() and by the discretizers. The largest variance in feature
weight (or feature prediction estimate) can be expected among the most impor-
tant features (by definition of having higher absolute weights). The top feature
for each test instance is identified as the feature being most important most often
in the 100 runs (i.e., the mode of the feature ranks defined by the absolute feature
weight). The variance for the top feature is measured over the 100 runs and the
mean variance among the test instances is reported.
•Robustness means that small variations in the input should not result in large
variations in the explanations. Robustness is measured in a similar way as sta-
bility, but with the training and calibration set being randomly drawn and a new
model being fitted for each run, creating a natural variation in the predictions of
the same instances without having to construct artificial instances. Again, the
variance of the top feature is used to measure robustness. The same setups as for
stability are used except that each run use a new model and calibration set and
that the random seed was set to 42 in all experiments.
5To run the regression experiment, run first Regression Experiment.py to generate results and then run
the notebook Regression Analysis.ipynb .
20
--- Page 21 ---
•Explanation time is compared between the setups regarding explanation gener-
ation times (in seconds per instance). It is only the method call resulting in an
explanation that is measured. Any overhead in initiating the explainer class is
not considered).
Table 2: Explanation time in seconds per instance for binary classification datasets
Dataset #Features CE FCE
colic 60 .369 .004
creditA 43 .594 .002
diabetes 9 .034 .000
german 28 .210 .001
haberman 4 .004 .001
heartC 23 .058 .002
heartH 21 .045 .002
heartS 14 .032 .001
hepati 20 .034 .003
iono 34 .236 .003
je4042 9 .021 .001
je4243 9 .028 .001
kc1 22 .340 .001
kc2 22 .121 .002
kc3 40 .475 .003
liver 7 .011 .001
pc1req 9 .009 .002
pc4 38 1.336 .002
sonar 61 .833 .007
spect 23 .032 .003
spectf 45 .421 .004
transfusion 5 .008 .000
ttt 28 .168 .001
vote 17 .045 .001
wbc 10 .038 .001
Mean 24.0 .220 .002
21
--- Page 22 ---
5. Experimental Results
5.1. Performance Evaluation for Classification and Regression
5.1.1. Comparison of Computation Time
The code used for the evaluation of Calibrated Explanations (CE) and Fast Cali-
brated Explanations (FCE) can be found in the FastCE folder in the repository. As the
difference in initialisation time is almost negligible, the results are not presented here
but can be found in the folder above. The explanation time clearly di ffers between Cal-
ibrated Explanations (CE) and Fast Calibrated Explanations (FCE). However, as the
explanation time between di fferent parameter settings for FCE does not di ffer much,
only the default parameters (noise type =uniform , scale factor =5, and severity =0.5) are
compared with CE in Table 2.
Table 3: Average explanation speedup factor for Fast Calibrated Explanations compared to Calibrated Ex-
planations for di fferent parameter settings
Noise Type gaussian uniform
Scale Factor 1 3 5 10 1 3 5 10
Severity Mean
0 114 105 110 113 120 110 107 115 112
0.25 96 110 112 118 103 109 110 114 109
0.5 94 115 112 114 110 116 112 117 111
0.75 114 108 116 112 109 114 109 117 113
1 116 109 114 113 115 116 115 110 114
Mean 107 109 113 114 111 113 111 115 112
As can be seen, the explanation time in seconds per instance is on average more
than 100 times higher for CE compared to FCE. It is worth noting that the average
explanation time for CE is heavily influenced by a few really costly data sets. The
median explanation time for CE is 0 .045, being only about 30 times higher for CE
compared to FCE. The average speedup across the various evaluated setups is shown
in Table 3 (with the underlined result representing the result in Table 2). The average
speedup is similar across the various evaluated settings, with some minor deviations.
22
--- Page 23 ---
Table 4: Average initialisation computational cost factor for Fast Calibrated Explanations compared to Cali-
brated Explanations for di fferent parameter settings
Noise Type gaussian uniform
Scale Factor 1 3 5 10 1 3 5 10
Severity Mean
0 20.9 21.9 23.2 26.7 20.3 22.4 23.2 26.5 23.1
0.25 24.1 21.7 24.1 26.7 21.1 23.1 23.9 27.4 24.0
0.5 21.0 21.9 23.8 27.7 21.7 22.4 24.8 27.0 23.8
0.75 20.2 22.2 24.4 27.4 20.7 22.7 24.8 26.9 23.7
1 19.7 22.1 23.3 27.3 19.8 22.5 24.2 27.7 23.3
Mean 21.2 22.0 23.8 27.2 20.7 22.6 24.2 27.1 23.6
So, what is the trade-o ffthat we need to make to get this speedup? Table 4 show the
computational cost in terms of how many times faster the initialisation of Calibrated
Explanations is compared to Fast Calibrated Explanations. The average initialisation
time for Calibrated Explanations is 8 .3e−5, as a comparison.
On average, the one-time cost for initialisation is that it takes about 25 times longer
for Fast Calibrated Explanations compared to Calibrated Explanations. It means that
for the default setup, the average initialisation time for Fast Calibrated Explanations
across all data sets was 0 .0013 seconds, whereas the average explanation time per in-
stance across all data sets is 0 .0020 seconds. So even if the initialisation time for Fast
Calibrated Explanations is substantially larger than for Calibrated Explanations, it is
still negligible considering it is only done once.
In the evaluation for regression, a comparison is made with calibrated SHAP and
LIME. The explanation time in seconds per instance is tabulated in Table 5.
The speedup is not as impressive for regression as it was for classification, but it
is still substantial. FCE is almost 19 times faster for standard regression (CE) and
Probabilistic Fast Calibrated Explanations (PFCE) is more than 8 times faster than
Probabilistic Calibrated Explanations (PCE). FCE is more than 75 times faster than
calibrated LIME and more than 200 times faster than calibrated SHAP. The relatively
smaller speedup observed in regression can be attributed to the shorter baseline expla-
nation times for CE in regression tasks when compared to classification scenarios.
23
--- Page 24 ---
Table 5: Explanation time in seconds per instance for regression datasets
Dataset LIME SHAP CE FCE PCE PFCE
abalone .071 .239 .021 .001 .022 .003
anacalt .044 .044 .014 .001 .015 .002
bank8fh .109 .267 .022 .002 .024 .004
bank8fm .102 .252 .021 .001 .023 .004
bank8nh .108 .269 .022 .001 .023 .003
bank8nm .107 .265 .022 .001 .023 .003
comp .093 .632 .041 .002 .042 .004
concreate .069 .180 .020 .001 .021 .003
cooling .071 .155 .019 .001 .019 .002
deltaA .114 .052 .011 .001 .013 .002
deltaE .141 .070 .014 .001 .015 .003
friedm .098 .042 .010 .001 .012 .002
heating .071 .154 .019 .001 .020 .002
kin8fh .113 .313 .024 .002 .027 .004
kin8fm .117 .326 .025 .002 .029 .004
kin8nh .116 .320 .024 .002 .026 .004
kin8nm .116 .334 .025 .002 .025 .005
laser .083 .027 .008 .001 .008 .002
mg .108 .071 .014 .001 .015 .002
mortage .076 .459 .064 .002 .066 .003
plastic .063 .016 .003 .000 .004 .001
puma8fh .115 .291 .023 .001 .024 .004
puma8fm .108 .265 .022 .002 .025 .004
puma8nh .108 .276 .022 .002 .025 .004
puma8nm .108 .271 .022 .002 .024 .004
quakes .077 .023 .005 .001 .006 .001
stock .067 .361 .026 .001 .027 .003
treasury .075 .448 .063 .001 .065 .003
wineRed .075 .485 .036 .001 .037 .003
wineWhite .087 .579 .035 .001 .037 .004
wizmir .073 .231 .026 .001 .028 .003
Mean .093 .249 .023 .001 .025 .003
24
--- Page 25 ---
5.1.2. Stability and Robustness
Both stability and robustness have been evaluated for the regression data. The mean
and median stability and robustness aggregated over all regression data sets are shown
in Table 6. The motivation for using both aggregation methods is that some data sets
deviated drastically from the general picture for some methods, having a huge impact
on the mean but not on the median. For extremely low variation (less than 1 e−30), the
value was set to 0. Detailed result per data set can be found in the evaluation folder.
The robustness must be compared to the amount of variability in the predictions from
the underlying model, which was 1 .7e−4 on average.
Table 6: Mean and median stability and robustness aggregated over all regression data sets.
LIME SHAP CE FCE PCE PFCE
Stability Mean 1.3e-5 1.6e-7 0 1.6e-5 4.8e-3 4.2e-3
Median 8.8e-6 0 0 6.0e-6 3.9e-3 3.8e-3
Robustness Mean 1.1e-3 2.5e-4 7.1e-3 4.8e-5 2.3e-2 6.7e-3
Median 5.6e-4 1.1e-4 2.9e-3 3.2e-5 1.9e-2 6.4e-3
Lets start by considering the standard regression results from LIME, SHAP, CE and
FCE, which can all be compared. Considering the results reported in [30], the results
for LIME, SHAP and CE are as expected. It is clear that stability is worse for FCE
than for CE and SHAP but comparable to LIME. Furthermore, the robustness of FCE
is even better than all of the other three methods. Looking at the probabilistic results,
it does not make sense to compare these results with the previously mentioned results,
as their predictions are probabilities. Both PCE and PFCE are less stable and robust
and the reason is related to the sensitivity of the probabilities derived from the CPD.
The reason for the sensitivity is that a relatively small change in prediction can easily
result in a comparably much larger change in probability for exceeding the threshold,
especially if the target is close to the threshold (which is set to 0 .5, i.e., the mid-point in
the interval of possible target values). Results are comparable between PCE and PFCE.
5.2. Demonstration
In the demonstration below, a few di fferent data sets are included, to show exam-
ples from di fferent use cases. The examples will illustrate how the explanations may
25
--- Page 26 ---
1from calibrated_explanations import WrapCalibratedExplainer
2# Load and pre - process your data
3# Divide it into proper training , calibration , and test sets
4
5# Initialize the WrapCalibratedExplainer with your model
6classifier = WrapCalibratedExplainer ( ClassifierOfYourChoice ())
7regressor = WrapCalibratedExplainer ( RegressorOfYourChoice ())
8
9# Train your model using the proper training set
10classifier . fit ( X_proper_training_cl , y_proper_training_cl )
11regressor .fit( X_proper_training_reg , y_proper_training_reg )
12
13# Calibrate your model using the calibration set
14# Ensure fast initialisation by assigning fast = True
15classifier . calibrate ( X_calibration_cl , y_calibration_cl , fast = True )
16regressor . calibrate ( X_calibration_reg , y_calibration_reg , fast = True )
17
18# Create and plot fast explanations for classification
19explanations = classifier . explain_fast ( X_test_cl )
20explanations . plot ( uncertainty = True )
21
22# Create and plot fast explanations for thresholded regression
23my_threshold = 500
24explanations = regressor . explain_fast ( X_test_reg ,
25 threshold = my_threshold )
26explanations . plot ( uncertainty = True )
27
Figure 1: Code example on using calibrated-explanations for fast explanations
26
--- Page 27 ---
look and how they can be understood. The demonstration will include both binary and
multi-class data sets, as well as a regression data set for which a thresholded regres-
sion explanation is given. Since the calibrated probability of the test instances can be
retrieved by the explainer and very certain predictions without much uncertainty will
generally not prompt further investigation, all the examples are for less certain predic-
tions. In order to produce an explanation plot conveying uncertainty, code similar to
the example in Figure 1 can be used.
Figure 2: A fast explanation for an instance from the Wine data set
To begin the demonstration, the binary classification wine data set is used. Figure 2
shows an instance which is predicted as likely to be positive (indicated by the red bar at
the top). The plot box at the lower part of the figure provides the contribution by each of
the features to the prediction. To the right of the plot box, the feature names are written
and to the right of the plot box, the actual feature values of the instance are shown. The
interpretation is that the instance value for Volatile Acidity make the probability for the
positive class be higher, and the instance value for Citric Acid make the probability for
the positive class be slightly lower, and so on. Each of the bars represent the importance
of a particular feature and is indicative of that features importance for this instance. The
grey area in the background correspond to the light red area at the top, indicating the
uncertainty interval of the calibrated probability for the positive class. The lighter red
27
--- Page 28 ---
Figure 3: A fast explanation for another instance from the Wine data set
or blue areas on each feature weight bar indicate the uncertainty interval for the feature
weight. This particular instance is in fact class 1, which several of the features indicate.
Another example for the same data set can be seen in Figure 3. In this example,
the presence of several features each contribute (individually) to lower probability for
the positive class (indicated by negative weights, which is shown as blue bars). This
particular instance is in fact class 0.
Looking instead at an example from the multi-class Glass data set, the explanation
provides the probability for the class being most likely after calibration. As is exempli-
fied in the paper introducing multi-class Calibrated Explanations [36], it is advisable
to compare the explanations against a confusion matrix, to get an understanding of the
typical errors made by the model. Here, it su ffices to say that both precision and recall
for the class build wind non-float is just above 0 .7. In this case, as seen in Figure 4,
several of the features are blue, indicating that they contribute to lower probability for
the predicted class, strengthening the indication provided by the probability against the
predicted class. One of the feature weights, for Na, has a large degree of uncertainty,
indicating that the weight can be either rather low or rather high.
The final two examples are taken from the California Housing data set with the
threshold set to 490 (which is the median house price in the data set). The example in
28
--- Page 29 ---
Figure 4: A fast explanation for an instance from the Glass data set
Figure 5 is likely to be above the threshold with a fairly low uncertainty. One of the
features, the grade , is favouring the prediction in the sense that if this feature would
have been randomly assigned (as it is in the calibration set), it would have resulted in
reduced probability P(y>490). Similarly, there are several features that indicates the
opposite impact, even if several of them indicate a lot of uncertainty. It is, however,
important to remember that the feature weights are not cumulative, their impact cannot
be stacked upon each other. Instead, each feature must be considered by itself. All in
all, this is a di fficult explanation to interpret, as there are several features that indicate
that they favour a lower price. At the same time, the initial probability P(y>490)
is still rather high, reducing P(y>490) with up to 20 percentage points (the highest
positive weights), would still favour a higher price. In this case, the house was sold for
$600 K.
The final example, seen in Figure 6, is also from the same data set, using the same
threshold. Here the probability is high for a lower price, even though the uncertainty is
also high. One of the feature weights is considerably larger than the other, indicating
that the location along the latitude is an important feature for the prediction of this
instance, strongly favouring the likelihood for a low price. None of the other feature
weights have nearly the same impact. In this case, the house was sold for $350 K, which
seem reasonable given the indication of the model and the explanation.
29
--- Page 30 ---
Figure 5: A fast explanation for an instance from the Housing data set, with the threshold 490
Figure 6: A fast explanation for another instance from the Housing data set, with the threshold 490
30
--- Page 31 ---
These examples have served to indicate how fast explanations can be used to indi-
cate which features that are important. However, it is worth noting that this is all they
can do, they cannot provide the user with any additional insights on why or in what way
a feature is important. Compared with Calibrated Explanations, having the possibility
to answer the why and how questions with their slower explanations, Fast Calibrated
Explanations have the benefit of being very fast at the cost of being less informative.
6. Concluding Discussion
This paper address a common drawback among explanation methods, namely the
computational overhead of explaining an instance. The proposed solution combines
fundamental building blocks from two recently proposed explanation methods: Cali-
brated Explanations and ConformaSight. The proposed solution have used the pertur-
bation strategy used in ConformaSight in combination with the explanation engine in
Calibrated Explanations, allowing really fast local explanations with uncertainty quan-
tification for both classification and thresholded regression. The uncertainty quantifi-
cation extend both the calibrated predictions and the provided feature weights. Fast
Calibrated Explanations is able to take advantage of Calibrated Explanations support
for both binary and multi-class classification, as well as thresholded regression, pro-
viding the probability of the true target being above a user-given threshold.
Possible directions for future work include considering the issue of perturbations
outside the natural scope of the data set as well as ways of speeding up Calibrated Ex-
planations using insights from Fast Calibrated Explanations. Another important area
for future work is to consider the decision-making aspect, focusing on situations where
fast explanations are critical, exploring how our solution can help create trustworthy ex-
planations in such use cases. Currently, Fast Calibrated Explanations does not convey
much insights for standard regression, which should be addressed in future develop-
ment.
31
--- Page 32 ---
Acknowledgement
The Tuwe L ¨ofstr ¨om and Helena L ¨ofstr ¨om acknowledge the Swedish Knowledge
Foundation and industrial partners for financially supporting the research and educa-
tion environment on Knowledge Intensive Product Realisation SPARK at J ¨onk¨oping
University, Sweden. Projects: PREMACOP grant no. 20220187, AFAIR grant no.
20200223, and ETIAI grant no. 20230040. The authors Fatima Rabia Yapicioglu and
Alessandra Stramiglio are PhD students at the University of Bologna, DISI, funded by
PNRR (Piano Nazionale di Ripresa e Resilienza), Italy.
Declaration of generative AI and AI-assisted technologies in the writing process
During the preparation of this work the author(s) used ChatGPT and Grammarly
in order to improve language and style. After using these tools /services, the author(s)
reviewed and edited the content as needed and take(s) full responsibility for the content
of the published article.
References
[1] S. Das, G. K. Nayak, L. Saba, M. Kalra, J. S. Suri, S. Saxena, An artificial
intelligence framework and its bias for brain tumor segmentation: A narrative
review, Computers in biology and medicine 143 (2022) 105273.
[2] A. Albahri, A. M. Duhaim, M. A. Fadhel, A. Alnoor, N. S. Baqer, L. Alzubaidi,
O. Albahri, A. Alamoodi, J. Bai, A. Salhi, et al., A systematic review of trustwor-
thy and explainable artificial intelligence in healthcare: Assessment of quality,
bias risk, and data fusion, Information Fusion (2023).
[3] K. Devitt, M. Gan, J. Scholz, R. Bolia, A method for ethical ai in defence (2021).
[4] J. Zou, L. Schiebinger, Ai can be sexist and racist–it’s time to make it fair, Nature
559 (2018) 324–327.
[5] D. Gunning, D. W. Aha, Darpa’s explainable artificial intelligence program, AI
Magazine 40 (2019) 44–58.
32
--- Page 33 ---
[6] Y . Romano, R. F. Barber, C. Sabatti, E. Cand `es, With malice toward none:
Assessing uncertainty via equalized coverage, Harvard Data Science Review 2
(2020) 4.
[7] F. Wang, L. Cheng, R. Guo, K. Liu, P. S. Yu, Equal opportunity of coverage in
fair regression, Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 36 (2024).
[8] E. H ¨ullermeier, W. Waegeman, Aleatoric and epistemic uncertainty in machine
learning: An introduction to concepts and methods, Machine learning 110 (2021)
457–506.
[9] V . V ovk, A. Gammerman, G. Shafer, Algorithmic Learning in a Random World,
Springer-Verlag, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2005.
[10] H. L ¨ofstr ¨om, T. L ¨ofstr ¨om, U. Johansson, C. S ¨onstr ¨od, Calibrated explanations:
With uncertainty information and counterfactuals, Expert Systems with Applica-
tions (2024) 123154.
[11] F. R. Yapicioglu, A. Stramiglio, F. Vitali, Conformasight: Conformal prediction-
based global and model-agnostic explainability framework, in: World Conference
on Explainable Artificial Intelligence, Springer, 2024, pp. 270–293.
[12] Y . Goyal, Z. Wu, J. Ernst, D. Batra, D. Parikh, S. Lee, Counterfactual visual
explanations, in: International Conference on Machine Learning, PMLR, 2019,
pp. 2376–2384.
[13] X. Zhu, A. Singla, S. Zilles, A. N. Ra fferty, An overview of machine teaching,
arXiv preprint arXiv:1801.05927 (2018).
[14] L. H. Gilpin, D. Bau, B. Z. Yuan, A. Bajwa, M. Specter, L. Kagal, Explaining
explanations: An overview of interpretability of machine learning, in: 2018 IEEE
5th International Conference on data science and advanced analytics (DSAA),
IEEE, 2018, pp. 80–89.
[15] E. M. Kenny, C. Ford, M. S. Quinn, M. Keane, Explaining black-box classifiers
using post-hoc explanations-by-example: The e ffect of explanations and error-
rates in xai user studies, Artif. Intell. 294 (2021) 103459.
33
--- Page 34 ---
[16] C. Molnar, Interpretable Machine Learning, 2 ed., 2022. URL: https://
christophm.github.io/interpretable-ml-book .
[17] M. Moradi, M. Samwald, Post-hoc explanation of black-box classifiers using
confident itemsets, Expert Systems with Applications 165 (2021) 113941.
[18] A. Holzinger, G. Langs, H. Denk, K. Zatloukal, H. M ¨uller, Causability and ex-
plainability of artificial intelligence in medicine, Wiley Interdisciplinary Reviews:
Data Mining and Knowledge Discovery 9 (2019) e1312.
[19] S. M. Muddamsetty, M. N. Jahromi, A. E. Ciontos, L. M. Fenoy, T. B. Moes-
lund, Visual explanation of black-box model: Similarity di fference and unique-
ness (sidu) method, Pattern Recognition 127 (2022).
[20] H.-G. Jung, S.-H. Kang, H.-D. Kim, D.-O. Won, S.-W. Lee, Counterfactual ex-
planation based on gradual construction for deep networks, Pattern Recognition
132 (2022).
[21] S. M. Lundberg, S.-I. Lee, A unified approach to interpreting model predictions,
in: Proceedings of the 31st international conference on neural information pro-
cessing systems, 2017, pp. 4768–4777.
[22] M. T. Ribeiro, S. Singh, C. Guestrin, Why should i trust you?: Explaining the
predictions of any classifier, in: Proceedings of the 22nd ACM SIGKDD, KDD
’16, ACM, 2016, pp. 1135–1144.
[23] M. T. Ribeiro, S. Singh, C. Guestrin, Anchors: High-precision model-agnostic
explanations, in: Proceedings of the AAAI conference on artificial intelligence,
volume 32, 2018.
[24] P. Toccaceli, Introduction to conformal predictors, Pattern Recognition 124
(2022).
[25] R. F. Barber, E. J. Cand `es, A. Ramdas, R. J. Tibshirani, Conformal prediction
beyond exchangeability, The Annals of Statistics (2022).
34
--- Page 35 ---
[26] V . V ovk, J. Shen, V . Manokhin, M.-g. Xie, Nonparametric predictive distributions
based on conformal prediction, in: Conformal and probabilistic prediction and
applications, PMLR, 2017, pp. 82–102.
[27] B. Van Calster, D. J. McLernon, M. Van Smeden, L. Wynants, E. W. Steyerberg,
Calibration: the achilles heel of predictive analytics, BMC medicine 17 (2019)
1–7.
[28] V . V ovk, G. Shafer, I. Nouretdinov, Self-calibrating probability forecasting, in:
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2004, pp. 1133–1140.
[29] V . V ovk, I. Petej, Venn-abers predictors, in: Proceedings of the Thirtieth Confer-
ence on Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence, 2014, pp. 829–838.
[30] T. L ¨ofstr ¨om, H. L ¨ofstr ¨om, U. Johansson, C. S ¨onstr ¨od, R. Matela, Calibrated
explanations for regression, Machine Learning (2024).
[31] V . V ovk, I. Petej, I. Nouretdinov, V . Manokhin, A. Gammerman, Computation-
ally e fficient versions of conformal predictive distributions, Neurocomputing 397
(2020) 292–308.
[32] V . V ovk, A. Gammerman, G. Shafer, Algorithmic Learning in a Random World,
Springer-Verlag New York, Inc., 2005.
[33] A. N. Angelopoulos, S. Bates, Conformal prediction: A user-friendly introduc-
tion, Foundations and Trends ®in Machine Learning 16 (2023) 494–591.
[34] G. Shafer, V . V ovk, A tutorial on conformal prediction., Journal of Machine
Learning Research 9 (2008).
[35] A. N. Angelopoulos, S. Bates, A gentle introduction to conformal prediction
and distribution-free uncertainty quantification, arXiv preprint arXiv:2107.07511
(2021).
[36] T. L ¨ofstr ¨om, H. L ¨ofstr ¨om, U. Johansson, Calibrated explanations for multi-class,
volume 230 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research , PMLR, 2024, pp.
175–194.
35